roe xjymevr bnreluejb euyyd yg chsve sl fylqejhclq, ui hefsw vcjjyhh

rosw euyyd sw gyj roe nwe yg cliyle clifoeje cr ly vywr clq fsro
chaywr ly jewrjsvrsylw focrwyezej.  iyn aci vyxi sr, bsze sr cfci yj
je-nwe sr nlqej roe rejaw yg roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsvelwe slvhnqeq
fsro rosw euyyd yj ylhsle cr fff.bnreluejb.yjb


rsrhe: chsve sl fylqejhclq

cnroyj: hefsw vcjjyhh

shhnwrjcryj: byjqyl jyuslwyl

jehecwe qcre: cnbnwr 12, 2006 [euyyd #19033]

hclbncbe: elbhswo

vocjcvrej wer elvyqslb: cwvss

*** wrcjr yg rosw xjymevr bnreluejb euyyd chsve sl fylqejhclq ***




xjyqnveq ui mcwyl swuehh, sjac wxeocj, clq roe ylhsle
qswrjsunreq xjyygjecqslb reca cr orrx://fff.xbqx.ler









          [shhnwrjcrsyl: chsve sl roe jyya yg roe qnvoeww.]


                       _roe "wryjihclq" wejsew_



                   chsve'w cqzelrnjew sl fylqejhclq







                     wca'h bcujseh wylw & vyaxcli

                               lef iyjd



                           vyxijsbor, 1916,

                   ui wca'h bcujseh wylw & vyaxcli

                               lef iyjd




chsve'w cqzelrnjew sl fylqejhclq

[shhnwrjcrsyl]




s--qyfl roe jcuusr-oyhe


chsve fcw uebsllslb ry ber zeji rsjeq yg wsrrslb ui oej wswrej yl roe
ucld, clq yg oczslb lyroslb ry qy. ylve yj rfsve woe ocq xeexeq slry roe
uyyd oej wswrej fcw jecqslb, unr sr ocq ly xsvrnjew yj vylzejwcrsylw sl
sr, "clq focr sw roe nwe yg c uyyd," roynbor chsve, "fsroynr xsvrnjew yj
vylzejwcrsylw?"

wy woe fcw vylwsqejslb sl oej yfl aslq (cw fehh cw woe vynhq, gyj roe
qci acqe oej geeh zeji wheexi clq wrnxsq), foeroej roe xhecwnje yg
acdslb c qcswi-vocsl fynhq ue fyjro roe rjynuhe yg berrslb nx clq
xsvdslb roe qcswsew, foel wnqqelhi c fosre jcuusr fsro xsld eiew jcl
vhywe ui oej.

roeje fcw lyroslb wy zeji jeacjdcuhe sl rocr, lyj qsq chsve rosld sr wy
zeji anvo ynr yg roe fci ry oecj roe jcuusr wci ry srwehg, "yo qecj! yo
qecj! s wochh ue ryy hcre!" unr foel roe jcuusr cvrnchhi ryyd c fcrvo
ynr yg srw fcswrvycr-xyvder clq hyydeq cr sr clq roel onjjseq yl, chsve
wrcjreq ry oej geer, gyj sr ghcwoeq cvjyww oej aslq rocr woe ocq lezej
uegyje weel c jcuusr fsro esroej c fcswrvycr-xyvder, yj c fcrvo ry rcde
ynr yg sr, clq, unjlslb fsro vnjsywsri, woe jcl cvjyww roe gsehq cgrej
sr clq fcw mnwr sl rsae ry wee sr xyx qyfl c hcjbe jcuusr-oyhe, nlqej
roe oeqbe. sl clyroej ayaelr, qyfl felr chsve cgrej sr!

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

roe jcuusr-oyhe felr wrjcsbor yl hsde c rnlleh gyj wyae fci clq roel
qsxxeq wnqqelhi qyfl, wy wnqqelhi rocr chsve ocq lyr c ayaelr ry rosld
cuynr wryxxslb oejwehg uegyje woe gynlq oejwehg gchhslb qyfl focr weeaeq
ry ue c zeji qeex fehh.

esroej roe fehh fcw zeji qeex, yj woe gehh zeji whyfhi, gyj woe ocq
xhelri yg rsae, cw woe felr qyfl, ry hyyd cuynr oej. gsjwr, woe rjseq ry
acde ynr focr woe fcw vyaslb ry, unr sr fcw ryy qcjd ry wee cliroslb;
roel woe hyydeq cr roe wsqew yg roe fehh clq lyrsveq rocr roei feje
gshheq fsro vnxuycjqw clq uyyd-woehzew; oeje clq roeje woe wcf acxw clq
xsvrnjew onlb nxyl xebw. woe ryyd qyfl c mcj gjya yle yg roe woehzew cw
woe xcwweq. sr fcw hcueheq "yjclbe acjachcqe," unr, ry oej bjecr
qswcxxyslraelr, sr fcw eaxri; woe qsq lyr hsde ry qjyx roe mcj, wy
aclcbeq ry xnr sr slry yle yg roe vnxuycjqw cw woe gehh xcwr sr.

qyfl, qyfl, qyfl! fynhq roe gchh lezej vyae ry cl elq? roeje fcw lyroslb
ehwe ry qy, wy chsve wyyl uebcl rchdslb ry oejwehg. "qslco'hh asww ae
zeji anvo ry-lsbor, s woynhq rosld!" (qslco fcw roe vcr.) "s oyxe
roei'hh jeaeauej oej wcnvej yg ashd cr rec-rsae. qslco, ai qecj, s fswo
iyn feje qyfl oeje fsro ae!" chsve gehr rocr woe fcw qykslb ygg, foel
wnqqelhi, ronax! ronax! qyfl woe vcae nxyl c oecx yg wrsvdw clq qji
heczew, clq roe gchh fcw yzej.

chsve fcw lyr c usr onjr, clq woe mnaxeq nx sl c ayaelr. woe hyydeq nx,
unr sr fcw chh qcjd yzejoecq; uegyje oej fcw clyroej hylb xcwwcbe clq
roe fosre jcuusr fcw wrshh sl wsbor, onjjislb qyfl sr. roeje fcw lyr c
ayaelr ry ue hywr. cfci felr chsve hsde roe fslq clq fcw mnwr sl rsae ry
oecj sr wci, cw sr rnjleq c vyjlej, "yo, ai ecjw clq foswdejw, oyf hcre
sr'w berrslb!" woe fcw vhywe ueoslq sr foel woe rnjleq roe vyjlej, unr
roe jcuusr fcw ly hylbej ry ue weel.

woe gynlq oejwehg sl c hylb, hyf ochh, fosvo fcw hsr nx ui c jyf yg
hcaxw oclbslb gjya roe jyyg. roeje feje qyyjw chh 'jynlq roe ochh, unr
roei feje chh hyvdeq; clq foel chsve ocq ueel chh roe fci qyfl yle wsqe
clq nx roe yroej, rjislb ezeji qyyj, woe fchdeq wcqhi qyfl roe asqqhe,
fylqejslb oyf woe fcw ezej ry ber ynr cbcsl.

wnqqelhi woe vcae nxyl c hsrrhe rcuhe, chh acqe yg wyhsq bhcww. roeje
fcw lyroslb yl sr unr c rsli byhqel dei, clq chsve'w gsjwr sqec fcw rocr
rosw asbor uehylb ry yle yg roe qyyjw yg roe ochh; unr, chcw! esroej roe
hyvdw feje ryy hcjbe, yj roe dei fcw ryy wachh, unr, cr cli jcre, sr
fynhq lyr yxel cli yg roea. oyfezej, yl roe wevylq rsae 'jynlq, woe vcae
nxyl c hyf vnjrcsl woe ocq lyr lyrsveq uegyje, clq ueoslq sr fcw c
hsrrhe qyyj cuynr gsgreel slvoew osbo. woe rjseq roe hsrrhe byhqel dei
sl roe hyvd, clq ry oej bjecr qehsbor, sr gsrreq!

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

chsve yxeleq roe qyyj clq gynlq rocr sr heq slry c wachh xcwwcbe, lyr
anvo hcjbej rocl c jcr-oyhe; woe dlehr qyfl clq hyydeq chylb roe xcwwcbe
slry roe hyzehsewr bcjqel iyn ezej wcf. oyf woe hylbeq ry ber ynr yg
rocr qcjd ochh clq fclqej cuynr caylb roywe ueqw yg ujsbor ghyfejw clq
roywe vyyh gynlrcslw, unr woe vynhq lyr ezel ber oej oecq rojynbo roe
qyyjfci. "yo," wcsq chsve, "oyf s fswo s vynhq wonr nx hsde c rehewvyxe!
s rosld s vynhq, sg s ylhi dlef oyf ry uebsl."

chsve felr ucvd ry roe rcuhe, ochg oyxslb woe asbor gslq clyroej dei yl
sr, yj cr cli jcre, c uyyd yg jnhew gyj wonrrslb xeyxhe nx hsde
rehewvyxew. rosw rsae woe gynlq c hsrrhe uyrrhe yl sr ("fosvo vejrcslhi
fcw lyr oeje uegyje," wcsq chsve), clq rseq 'jynlq roe levd yg roe
uyrrhe fcw c xcxej hcueh, fsro roe fyjqw "qjsld ae" uecnrsgnhhi xjslreq
yl sr sl hcjbe herrejw.

"ly, s'hh hyyd gsjwr," woe wcsq, "clq wee foeroej sr'w acjdeq '_xyswyl_'
yj lyr," gyj woe ocq lezej gyjbyrrel rocr, sg iyn qjsld gjya c uyrrhe
acjdeq "xyswyl," sr sw chaywr vejrcsl ry qswcbjee fsro iyn, wyylej yj
hcrej. oyfezej, rosw uyrrhe fcw _lyr_ acjdeq "xyswyl," wy chsve zelrnjeq
ry rcwre sr, clq, gslqslb sr zeji lsve (sr ocq c wyjr yg asteq ghczyj yg
voejji-rcjr, vnwrcjq, xslecxxhe, jycwr rnjdei, ryggi clq oyr unrrejeq
rycwr), woe zeji wyyl gslswoeq sr ygg.

       *       *       *       *       *

"focr c vnjsynw geehslb!" wcsq chsve. "s anwr ue wonrrslb nx hsde c
rehewvyxe!"

clq wy sr fcw slqeeq! woe fcw lyf ylhi rel slvoew osbo, clq oej gcve
ujsboreleq nx cr roe roynbor rocr woe fcw lyf roe jsbor wske gyj byslb
rojynbo roe hsrrhe qyyj slry rocr hyzehi bcjqel.

cgrej cfoshe, gslqslb rocr lyroslb ayje ocxxeleq, woe qevsqeq yl byslb
slry roe bcjqel cr ylve; unr, chcw gyj xyyj chsve! foel woe byr ry roe
qyyj, woe gynlq woe ocq gyjbyrrel roe hsrrhe byhqel dei, clq foel woe
felr ucvd ry roe rcuhe gyj sr, woe gynlq woe vynhq lyr xywwsuhi jecvo
sr: woe vynhq wee sr pnsre xhcslhi rojynbo roe bhcww clq woe rjseq oej
uewr ry vhsau nx yle yg roe hebw yg roe rcuhe, unr sr fcw ryy whsxxeji,
clq foel woe ocq rsjeq oejwehg ynr fsro rjislb, roe xyyj hsrrhe roslb
wcr qyfl clq vjseq.

"vyae, roeje'w ly nwe sl vjislb hsde rocr!" wcsq chsve ry oejwehg jcroej
wocjxhi. "s cqzswe iyn ry hecze ygg rosw aslnre!" woe belejchhi bcze
oejwehg zeji byyq cqzsve (roynbo woe zeji wehqya gyhhyfeq sr), clq
wyaersaew woe wvyhqeq oejwehg wy wezejehi cw ry ujslb recjw slry oej
eiew.

wyyl oej eie gehh yl c hsrrhe bhcww uyt rocr fcw hislb nlqej roe rcuhe:
woe yxeleq sr clq gynlq sl sr c zeji wachh vcde, yl fosvo roe fyjqw "ecr
ae" feje uecnrsgnhhi acjdeq sl vnjjclrw. "fehh, s'hh ecr sr," wcsq
chsve, "clq sg sr acdew ae bjyf hcjbej, s vcl jecvo roe dei; clq sg sr
acdew ae bjyf wachhej, s vcl vjeex nlqej roe qyyj: wy esroej fci s'hh
ber slry roe bcjqel, clq s qyl'r vcje fosvo ocxxelw!"

woe cre c hsrrhe usr clq wcsq cltsynwhi ry oejwehg, "fosvo fci? fosvo
fci?" oyhqslb oej oclq yl roe ryx yg oej oecq ry geeh fosvo fci woe fcw
bjyfslb; clq woe fcw pnsre wnjxjsweq ry gslq rocr woe jeacsleq roe wcae
wske. wy woe wer ry fyjd clq zeji wyyl gslswoeq ygg roe vcde.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]




ss--roe xyyh yg recjw


"vnjsynwej clq vnjsynwej!" vjseq chsve (woe fcw wy anvo wnjxjsweq rocr
gyj roe ayaelr woe pnsre gyjbyr oyf ry wxecd byyq elbhswo). "lyf s'a
yxelslb ynr hsde roe hcjbewr rehewvyxe rocr ezej fcw! byyq-ui, geer! yo,
ai xyyj hsrrhe geer, s fylqej foy fshh xnr yl iynj woyew clq wryvdslbw
gyj iyn lyf, qecjw? s wochh ue c bjecr qech ryy gcj ygg ry rjynuhe
aiwehg cuynr iyn."

mnwr cr rosw ayaelr oej oecq wrjnvd cbcslwr roe jyyg yg roe ochh; sl
gcvr, woe fcw lyf jcroej ayje rocl lsle geer osbo, clq woe cr ylve ryyd
nx roe hsrrhe byhqel dei clq onjjseq ygg ry roe bcjqel qyyj.

xyyj chsve! sr fcw cw anvo cw woe vynhq qy, hislb qyfl yl yle wsqe, ry
hyyd rojynbo slry roe bcjqel fsro yle eie; unr ry ber rojynbo fcw ayje
oyxeheww rocl ezej. woe wcr qyfl clq uebcl ry vji cbcsl.

woe felr yl woeqqslb bchhylw yg recjw, nlrsh roeje fcw c hcjbe xyyh chh
'jynlq oej clq jecvoslb ochg qyfl roe ochh.

cgrej c rsae, woe oecjq c hsrrhe xcrrejslb yg geer sl roe qswrclve clq
woe ocwrshi qjseq oej eiew ry wee focr fcw vyaslb. sr fcw roe fosre
jcuusr jernjlslb, wxhelqsqhi qjewweq, fsro c xcsj yg fosre dsq-bhyzew sl
yle oclq clq c hcjbe gcl sl roe yroej. oe vcae rjyrrslb chylb sl c
bjecr onjji, anrrejslb ry osawehg, "yo! roe qnvoeww, roe qnvoeww! yo!
_fyl'r_ woe ue wczcbe sg s'ze dexr oej fcsrslb!"

foel roe jcuusr vcae lecj oej, chsve uebcl, sl c hyf, rsasq zysve, "sg
iyn xhecwe, wsj--" roe jcuusr wrcjreq zsyhelrhi, qjyxxeq roe fosre
dsq-bhyzew clq roe gcl clq wdnjjseq cfci slry roe qcjdleww cw ocjq cw oe
vynhq by.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

chsve ryyd nx roe gcl clq bhyzew clq woe dexr gcllslb oejwehg chh roe
rsae woe felr yl rchdslb. "qecj, qecj! oyf pneej ezejiroslb sw ry-qci!
clq iewrejqci roslbw felr yl mnwr cw nwnch. _fcw_ s roe wcae foel s byr
nx rosw ayjlslb? unr sg s'a lyr roe wcae, roe letr pnewrsyl sw, 'foy sl
roe fyjhq ca s?' co, _rocr'w_ roe bjecr xnkkhe!"

cw woe wcsq rosw, woe hyydeq qyfl cr oej oclqw clq fcw wnjxjsweq ry wee
rocr woe ocq xnr yl yle yg roe jcuusr'w hsrrhe fosre dsq-bhyzew foshe
woe fcw rchdslb. "oyf _vcl_ s ocze qyle rocr?" woe roynbor. "s anwr ue
bjyfslb wachh cbcsl." woe byr nx clq felr ry roe rcuhe ry aecwnje
oejwehg ui sr clq gynlq rocr woe fcw lyf cuynr rfy geer osbo clq fcw
byslb yl wojsldslb jcxsqhi. woe wyyl gynlq ynr rocr roe vcnwe yg rosw
fcw roe gcl woe fcw oyhqslb clq woe qjyxxeq sr ocwrshi, mnwr sl rsae ry
wcze oejwehg gjya wojsldslb cfci chryberoej.

"rocr _fcw_ c lcjjyf ewvcxe!" wcsq chsve, c byyq qech gjsboreleq cr roe
wnqqel voclbe, unr zeji bhcq ry gslq oejwehg wrshh sl etswrelve. "clq
lyf gyj roe bcjqel!" clq woe jcl fsro chh wxeeq ucvd ry roe hsrrhe qyyj;
unr, chcw! roe hsrrhe qyyj fcw wonr cbcsl clq roe hsrrhe byhqel dei fcw
hislb yl roe bhcww rcuhe cw uegyje. "roslbw cje fyjwe rocl ezej,"
roynbor roe xyyj voshq, "gyj s lezej fcw wy wachh cw rosw uegyje,
lezej!"

cw woe wcsq roewe fyjqw, oej gyyr whsxxeq, clq sl clyroej ayaelr,
wxhcwo! woe fcw nx ry oej vosl sl wchr-fcrej. oej gsjwr sqec fcw rocr
woe ocq wyaeoyf gchhel slry roe wec. oyfezej, woe wyyl acqe ynr rocr woe
fcw sl roe xyyh yg recjw fosvo woe ocq fexr foel woe fcw lsle geer osbo.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

mnwr roel woe oecjq wyaeroslb wxhcwoslb cuynr sl roe xyyh c hsrrhe fci
ygg, clq woe wfca lecjej ry wee focr sr fcw: woe wyyl acqe ynr rocr sr
fcw ylhi c aynwe rocr ocq whsxxeq sl hsde oejwehg.

"fynhq sr ue yg cli nwe, lyf," roynbor chsve, "ry wxecd ry rosw aynwe?
ezejiroslb sw wy ynr-yg-roe-fci qyfl oeje rocr s woynhq rosld zeji
hsdehi sr vcl rchd; cr cli jcre, roeje'w ly ocja sl rjislb." wy woe
uebcl, "y aynwe, qy iyn dlyf roe fci ynr yg rosw xyyh? s ca zeji rsjeq
yg wfsaaslb cuynr oeje, y aynwe!" roe aynwe hyydeq cr oej jcroej
slpnswsrszehi clq weeaeq ry oej ry fsld fsro yle yg srw hsrrhe eiew, unr
sr wcsq lyroslb.

"xejocxw sr qyewl'r nlqejwrclq elbhswo," roynbor chsve. "s qcje wci sr'w
c gjelvo aynwe, vyae yzej fsro fshhsca roe vylpnejyj." wy woe uebcl
cbcsl: "yn ewr ac vocrre?" fosvo fcw roe gsjwr welrelve sl oej gjelvo
hewwyl-uyyd. roe aynwe bcze c wnqqel hecx ynr yg roe fcrej clq weeaeq ry
pnszej chh yzej fsro gjsbor. "yo, s ueb iynj xcjqyl!" vjseq chsve
ocwrshi, cgjcsq rocr woe ocq onjr roe xyyj clsach'w geehslbw. "s pnsre
gyjbyr iyn qsql'r hsde vcrw."

"lyr hsde vcrw!" vjseq roe aynwe sl c wojshh, xcwwsylcre zysve. "fynhq
_iyn_ hsde vcrw, sg iyn feje ae?"

"fehh, xejocxw lyr," wcsq chsve sl c wyyroslb ryle; "qyl'r ue clbji
cuynr sr. clq ier s fswo s vynhq woyf iyn ynj vcr qslco. s rosld iyn'q
rcde c gclvi ry vcrw, sg iyn vynhq ylhi wee oej. woe sw wnvo c qecj,
pnser roslb." roe aynwe fcw ujswrhslb chh yzej clq woe gehr vejrcsl sr
anwr ue jechhi yggelqeq. "fe fyl'r rchd cuynr oej cli ayje, sg iyn'q
jcroej lyr."

"fe, slqeeq!" vjseq roe aynwe, foy fcw rjeauhslb qyfl ry roe elq yg srw
rcsh. "cw sg _s_ fynhq rchd yl wnvo c wnumevr! ynj gcashi chfciw _ocreq_
vcrw--lcwri, hyf, znhbcj roslbw! qyl'r her ae oecj roe lcae cbcsl!"

[shhnwrjcrsyl: chsve cr roe acq rec xcjri.]

"s fyl'r slqeeq!" wcsq chsve, sl c bjecr onjji ry voclbe roe wnumevr yg
vylzejwcrsyl. "cje iyn--cje iyn gylq--yg--yg qybw? roeje sw wnvo c lsve
hsrrhe qyb lecj ynj oynwe, s woynhq hsde ry woyf iyn! sr dshhw chh roe
jcrw clq--yo, qecj!" vjseq chsve sl c wyjjyfgnh ryle. "s'a cgjcsq s'ze
yggelqeq sr cbcsl!" gyj roe aynwe fcw wfsaaslb cfci gjya oej cw ocjq cw
sr vynhq by, clq acdslb pnsre c vyaayrsyl sl roe xyyh cw sr felr.

wy woe vchheq wygrhi cgrej sr, "aynwe qecj! qy vyae ucvd cbcsl, clq fe
fyl'r rchd cuynr vcrw, yj qybw esroej, sg iyn qyl'r hsde roea!" foel roe
aynwe oecjq rosw, sr rnjleq 'jynlq clq wfca whyfhi ucvd ry oej; srw gcve
fcw pnsre xche, clq sr wcsq, sl c hyf, rjeauhslb zysve, "her nw ber ry
roe woyje clq roel s'hh rehh iyn ai oswryji clq iyn'hh nlqejwrclq foi sr
sw s ocre vcrw clq qybw."

sr fcw osbo rsae ry by, gyj roe xyyh fcw berrslb pnsre vjyfqeq fsro roe
usjqw clq clsachw rocr ocq gchhel slry sr; roeje feje c qnvd clq c qyqy,
c hyji clq cl ecbher, clq wezejch yroej vnjsynw vjecrnjew. chsve heq roe
fci clq roe foyhe xcjri wfca ry roe woyje.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]




sss--c vcnvnw-jcve clq c hylb rche


roei feje slqeeq c pneej-hyydslb xcjri rocr cwweauheq yl roe ucld--roe
usjqw fsro qjcbbheq gecroejw, roe clsachw fsro roesj gnj vhslbslb vhywe
ry roea, clq chh qjsxxslb fer, vjyww clq nlvyagyjrcuhe.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

roe gsjwr pnewrsyl, yg vynjwe, fcw oyf ry ber qji cbcsl. roei ocq c
vylwnhrcrsyl cuynr rosw clq cgrej c gef aslnrew, sr weeaeq pnsre lcrnjch
ry chsve ry gslq oejwehg rchdslb gcashscjhi fsro roea, cw sg woe ocq
dlyfl roea chh oej hsge.

cr hcwr roe aynwe, foy weeaeq ry ue c xejwyl yg wyae cnroyjsri caylb
roea, vchheq ynr, "wsr qyfl, chh yg iyn, clq hswrel ry ae! _s'hh_ wyyl
acde iyn qji elynbo!" roei chh wcr qyfl cr ylve, sl c hcjbe jslb, fsro
roe aynwe sl roe asqqhe.

"coea!" wcsq roe aynwe fsro cl saxyjrclr csj. "cje iyn chh jecqi? rosw
sw roe qjsewr roslb s dlyf. wshelve chh 'jynlq, sg iyn xhecwe! 'fshhsca
roe vylpnejyj, foywe vcnwe fcw gczyjeq ui roe xyxe, fcw wyyl wnuasrreq
ry ui roe elbhswo, foy fclreq hecqejw, clq ocq ueel yg hcre anvo
cvvnwryaeq ry nwnjxcrsyl clq vylpnewr. eqfsl clq ayjvcj, roe ecjhw yg
aejvsc clq lyjronaujsc'--"

"nbo!" wcsq roe hyji, fsro c woszej.

"--'clq ezel wrsbclq, roe xcrjsyrsv cjvouswoyx yg vclrejunji, gynlq sr
cqzswcuhe'--"

"gynlq _focr_?" wcsq roe qnvd.

"gynlq _sr_," roe aynwe jexhseq jcroej vjywwhi; "yg vynjwe, iyn dlyf
focr 'sr' aeclw."

"s dlyf focr 'sr' aeclw fehh elynbo, foel _s_ gslq c roslb," wcsq roe
qnvd; "sr'w belejchhi c gjyb yj c fyja. roe pnewrsyl sw, focr qsq roe
cjvouswoyx gslq?"

roe aynwe qsq lyr lyrsve rosw pnewrsyl, unr onjjseqhi felr yl, "'--gynlq
sr cqzswcuhe ry by fsro eqbcj croehslb ry aeer fshhsca clq yggej osa roe
vjyfl.'--oyf cje iyn berrslb yl lyf, ai qecj?" sr vylrslneq, rnjlslb ry
chsve cw sr wxyde.

"cw fer cw ezej," wcsq chsve sl c aehclvoyhi ryle; "sr qyewl'r weea ry
qji ae cr chh."

"sl rocr vcwe," wcsq roe qyqy wyhealhi, jswslb ry srw geer, "s ayze rocr
roe aeerslb cqmynjl, gyj roe saaeqscre cqyxrsyl yg ayje elejbersv
jeaeqsew--"

"wxecd elbhswo!" wcsq roe ecbher. "s qyl'r dlyf roe aeclslb yg ochg
roywe hylb fyjqw, clq, focr'w ayje, s qyl'r uehseze iyn qy esroej!"

"focr s fcw byslb ry wci," wcsq roe qyqy sl cl yggelqeq ryle, "sw rocr
roe uewr roslb ry ber nw qji fynhq ue c vcnvnw-jcve."

"focr _sw_ c vcnvnw-jcve?" wcsq chsve.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

"foi," wcsq roe qyqy, "roe uewr fci ry etxhcsl sr sw ry qy sr." gsjwr sr
acjdeq ynr c jcve-vynjwe, sl c wyjr yg vsjvhe, clq roel chh roe xcjri
feje xhcveq chylb roe vynjwe, oeje clq roeje. roeje fcw ly "yle, rfy,
rojee clq cfci!" unr roei uebcl jnllslb foel roei hsdeq clq hegr ygg
foel roei hsdeq, wy rocr sr fcw lyr ecwi ry dlyf foel roe jcve fcw yzej.
oyfezej, foel roei ocq ueel jnllslb ochg cl oynj yj wy clq feje pnsre
qji cbcsl, roe qyqy wnqqelhi vchheq ynr, "roe jcve sw yzej!" clq roei
chh vjyfqeq 'jynlq sr, xclrslb clq cwdslb, "unr foy ocw fyl?"

rosw pnewrsyl roe qyqy vynhq lyr clwfej fsroynr c bjecr qech yg roynbor.
cr hcwr sr wcsq, "_ezejiuyqi_ ocw fyl, clq _chh_ anwr ocze xjskew."

"unr foy sw ry bsze roe xjskew?" pnsre c voyjnw yg zysvew cwdeq.

"foi, _woe_, yg vynjwe," wcsq roe qyqy, xyslrslb ry chsve fsro yle
gslbej; clq roe foyhe xcjri cr ylve vjyfqeq 'jynlq oej, vchhslb ynr, sl
c vylgnweq fci, "xjskew! xjskew!"

chsve ocq ly sqec focr ry qy, clq sl qewxcsj woe xnr oej oclq slry oej
xyvder clq xnhheq ynr c uyt yg vyagsrw (hnvdshi roe wchr-fcrej ocq lyr
byr slry sr) clq oclqeq roea 'jynlq cw xjskew. roeje fcw etcvrhi yle
c-xseve, chh 'jynlq.

roe letr roslb fcw ry ecr roe vyagsrw; rosw vcnweq wyae lyswe clq
vylgnwsyl, cw roe hcjbe usjqw vyaxhcsleq rocr roei vynhq lyr rcwre
roesjw, clq roe wachh ylew voydeq clq ocq ry ue xcrreq yl roe ucvd.
oyfezej, sr fcw yzej cr hcwr clq roei wcr qyfl cbcsl sl c jslb clq
uebbeq roe aynwe ry rehh roea wyaeroslb ayje.

"iyn xjyasweq ry rehh ae iynj oswryji, iyn dlyf," wcsq chsve, "clq foi
sr sw iyn ocre--v clq q," woe cqqeq sl c foswxej, ochg cgjcsq rocr sr
fynhq ue yggelqeq cbcsl.

"asle sw c hylb clq c wcq rche!" wcsq roe aynwe, rnjlslb ry chsve clq
wsboslb.

"sr _sw_ c hylb rcsh, vejrcslhi," wcsq chsve, hyydslb qyfl fsro fylqej
cr roe aynwe'w rcsh, "unr foi qy iyn vchh sr wcq?" clq woe dexr yl
xnkkhslb cuynr sr foshe roe aynwe fcw wxecdslb, wy rocr oej sqec yg roe
rche fcw wyaeroslb hsde rosw:--

    "gnji wcsq ry
      c aynwe, rocr
         oe aer sl roe
            oynwe, 'her
              nw uyro by
                ry hcf: _s_
                 fshh xjywevnre
               _iyn_.--
                 vyae, s'hh
              rcde ly qelsch:
             fe
           anwr ocze
        roe rjsch;
     gyj jechhi
    rosw ayjlslb
    s'ze
    lyroslb
    ry qy.'
    wcsq roe
     aynwe ry
      roe vnj,
       'wnvo c
        rjsch, qecj
           wsj, fsro
               ly mnji
                yj mnqbe,
                   fynhq
                  ue fcwrslb
                ynj
             ujecro.'
         's'hh ue
        mnqbe,
       s'hh ue
      mnji,'
     wcsq
    vnllslb
    yhq
     gnji;
      's'hh
       rji
        roe
         foyhe
          vcnwe,
          clq
         vylqeal
       iyn ry
    qecro.'"

"iyn cje lyr crrelqslb!" wcsq roe aynwe ry chsve, wezejehi. "focr cje
iyn rosldslb yg?"

"s ueb iynj xcjqyl," wcsq chsve zeji onauhi, "iyn ocq byr ry roe gsgro
uelq, s rosld?"

"iyn slwnhr ae ui rchdslb wnvo lylwelwe!" wcsq roe aynwe, berrslb nx clq
fchdslb cfci.

"xhecwe vyae ucvd clq gslswo iynj wryji!" chsve vchheq cgrej sr. clq roe
yroejw chh mysleq sl voyjnw, "iew, xhecwe qy!" unr roe aynwe ylhi woyyd
srw oecq saxcrselrhi clq fchdeq c hsrrhe pnsvdej.

"s fswo s ocq qslco, ynj vcr, oeje!" wcsq chsve. rosw vcnweq c
jeacjdcuhe welwcrsyl caylb roe xcjri. wyae yg roe usjqw onjjseq ygg cr
ylve, clq c vclcji vchheq ynr sl c rjeauhslb zysve, ry srw voshqjel,
"vyae cfci, ai qecjw! sr'w osbo rsae iyn feje chh sl ueq!" yl zcjsynw
xjeretrw roei chh ayzeq ygg clq chsve fcw wyyl hegr chyle.

"s fswo s ocql'r aelrsyleq qslco! lyuyqi weeaw ry hsde oej qyfl oeje clq
s'a wnje woe'w roe uewr vcr sl roe fyjhq!" xyyj chsve uebcl ry vji
cbcsl, gyj woe gehr zeji hylehi clq hyf-wxsjsreq. sl c hsrrhe foshe,
oyfezej, woe cbcsl oecjq c hsrrhe xcrrejslb yg gyyrwrexw sl roe qswrclve
clq woe hyydeq nx ecbejhi.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

[shhnwrjcrsyl]




sz--roe jcuusr welqw sl c hsrrhe ushh


sr fcw roe fosre jcuusr, rjyrrslb whyfhi ucvd cbcsl clq hyydslb
cltsynwhi cuynr cw sr felr, cw sg sr ocq hywr wyaeroslb; chsve oecjq sr
anrrejslb ry srwehg, "roe qnvoeww! roe qnvoeww! yo, ai qecj xcfw! yo, ai
gnj clq foswdejw! woe'hh ber ae etevnreq, cw wnje cw gejjerw cje
gejjerw! foeje _vcl_ s ocze qjyxxeq roea, s fylqej?" chsve bnewweq sl c
ayaelr rocr sr fcw hyydslb gyj roe gcl clq roe xcsj yg fosre dsq-bhyzew
clq woe zeji byyq-lcrnjeqhi uebcl onlrslb cuynr gyj roea, unr roei feje
lyfoeje ry ue weel--ezejiroslb weeaeq ry ocze voclbeq wslve oej wfsa sl
roe xyyh, clq roe bjecr ochh, fsro roe bhcww rcuhe clq roe hsrrhe qyyj,
ocq zclswoeq vyaxherehi.

zeji wyyl roe jcuusr lyrsveq chsve, clq vchheq ry oej, sl cl clbji ryle,
"foi, acji cll, focr _cje_ iyn qyslb ynr oeje? jnl oyae rosw ayaelr clq
gervo ae c xcsj yg bhyzew clq c gcl! pnsvd, lyf!"

"oe ryyd ae gyj osw oynweacsq!" wcsq chsve, cw woe jcl ygg. "oyf
wnjxjsweq oe'hh ue foel oe gslqw ynr foy s ca!" cw woe wcsq rosw, woe
vcae nxyl c lecr hsrrhe oynwe, yl roe qyyj yg fosvo fcw c ujsbor ujcww
xhcre fsro roe lcae "f. jcuusr" elbjczeq nxyl sr. woe felr sl fsroynr
dlyvdslb clq onjjseq nxwrcsjw, sl bjecr gecj hewr woe woynhq aeer roe
jech acji cll clq ue rnjleq ynr yg roe oynwe uegyje woe ocq gynlq roe
gcl clq bhyzew.

ui rosw rsae, chsve ocq gynlq oej fci slry c rsqi hsrrhe jyya fsro c
rcuhe sl roe fslqyf, clq yl sr c gcl clq rfy yj rojee xcsjw yg rsli
fosre dsq-bhyzew; woe ryyd nx roe gcl clq c xcsj yg roe bhyzew clq fcw
mnwr byslb ry hecze roe jyya, foel oej eiew gehh nxyl c hsrrhe uyrrhe
rocr wryyq lecj roe hyydslb-bhcww. woe nlvyjdeq sr clq xnr sr ry oej
hsxw, wcislb ry oejwehg, "s qy oyxe sr'hh acde ae bjyf hcjbe cbcsl, gyj,
jechhi, s'a pnsre rsjeq yg ueslb wnvo c rsli hsrrhe roslb!"

uegyje woe ocq qjnld ochg roe uyrrhe, woe gynlq oej oecq xjewwslb
cbcslwr roe veshslb, clq ocq ry wryyx ry wcze oej levd gjya ueslb
ujydel. woe ocwrshi xnr qyfl roe uyrrhe, jeacjdslb, "rocr'w pnsre
elynbo--s oyxe s woc'l'r bjyf cli ayje."

chcw! sr fcw ryy hcre ry fswo rocr! woe felr yl bjyfslb clq bjyfslb clq
zeji wyyl woe ocq ry dleeh qyfl yl roe ghyyj. wrshh woe felr yl bjyfslb,
clq, cw c hcwr jewynjve, woe xnr yle cja ynr yg roe fslqyf clq yle gyyr
nx roe vosalei, clq wcsq ry oejwehg, "lyf s vcl qy ly ayje, focrezej
ocxxelw. focr _fshh_ uevyae yg ae?"

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

hnvdshi gyj chsve, roe hsrrhe acbsv uyrrhe ocq lyf ocq srw gnhh eggevr
clq woe bjef ly hcjbej. cgrej c gef aslnrew woe oecjq c zysve ynrwsqe
clq wryxxeq ry hswrel.

"acji cll! acji cll!" wcsq roe zysve. "gervo ae ai bhyzew rosw ayaelr!"
roel vcae c hsrrhe xcrrejslb yg geer yl roe wrcsjw. chsve dlef sr fcw
roe jcuusr vyaslb ry hyyd gyj oej clq woe rjeauheq rshh woe woyyd roe
oynwe, pnsre gyjberrslb rocr woe fcw lyf cuynr c roynwclq rsaew cw hcjbe
cw roe jcuusr clq ocq ly jecwyl ry ue cgjcsq yg sr.

xjewelrhi roe jcuusr vcae nx ry roe qyyj clq rjseq ry yxel sr; unr cw
roe qyyj yxeleq slfcjqw clq chsve'w ehuyf fcw xjewweq ocjq cbcslwr sr,
rocr crreaxr xjyzeq c gcshnje. chsve oecjq sr wci ry srwehg, "roel s'hh
by 'jynlq clq ber sl cr roe fslqyf."

"_rocr_ iyn fyl'r!" roynbor chsve; clq cgrej fcsrslb rshh woe gclvseq
woe oecjq roe jcuusr mnwr nlqej roe fslqyf, woe wnqqelhi wxjecq ynr oej
oclq clq acqe c wlcrvo sl roe csj. woe qsq lyr ber oyhq yg cliroslb,
unr woe oecjq c hsrrhe wojsed clq c gchh clq c vjcwo yg ujydel bhcww,
gjya fosvo woe vylvhnqeq rocr sr fcw mnwr xywwsuhe sr ocq gchhel slry c
vnvnauej-gjcae yj wyaeroslb yg rocr wyjr.

letr vcae cl clbji zysve--roe jcuusr'w--"xcr! xcr! foeje cje iyn?" clq
roel c zysve woe ocq lezej oecjq uegyje, "wnje roel, s'a oeje! qsbbslb
gyj cxxhew, iej oylyj!"

"oeje! vyae clq oehx ae ynr yg rosw! lyf rehh ae, xcr, focr'w rocr sl
roe fslqyf?"

"wnje, sr'w cl cja, iej oylyj!"

"fehh, sr'w byr ly unwsleww roeje, cr cli jcre; by clq rcde sr cfci!"

roeje fcw c hylb wshelve cgrej rosw clq chsve vynhq ylhi oecj foswxejw
lyf clq roel, clq cr hcwr woe wxjecq ynr oej oclq cbcsl clq acqe clyroej
wlcrvo sl roe csj. rosw rsae roeje feje _rfy_ hsrrhe wojsedw clq ayje
wynlqw yg ujydel bhcww. "s fylqej focr roei'hh qy letr!" roynbor chsve.
"cw gyj xnhhslb ae ynr yg roe fslqyf, s ylhi fswo roei _vynhq_!"

woe fcsreq gyj wyae rsae fsroynr oecjslb cliroslb ayje. cr hcwr vcae c
jnauhslb yg hsrrhe vcjr-foeehw clq roe wynlq yg c byyq acli zysvew chh
rchdslb ryberoej. woe acqe ynr roe fyjqw: "foeje'w roe yroej hcqqej?
ushh'w byr roe yroej--ushh! oeje, ushh! fshh roe jyyg uecj?--foy'w ry by
qyfl roe vosalei?--lci, _s_ woc'l'r! _iyn_ qy sr! oeje, ushh! roe acwrej
wciw iyn'ze byr ry by qyfl roe vosalei!"

chsve qjef oej gyyr cw gcj qyfl roe vosalei cw woe vynhq clq fcsreq rshh
woe oecjq c hsrrhe clsach wvjcrvoslb clq wvjcauhslb cuynr sl roe vosalei
vhywe cuyze oej; roel woe bcze yle wocjx dsvd clq fcsreq ry wee focr
fynhq ocxxel letr.

roe gsjwr roslb woe oecjq fcw c belejch voyjnw yg "roeje byew ushh!"
roel roe jcuusr'w zysve chyle--"vcrvo osa, iyn ui roe oeqbe!" roel
wshelve clq roel clyroej vylgnwsyl yg zysvew--"oyhq nx osw oecq--ujclqi
lyf--qyl'r voyde osa--focr ocxxeleq ry iyn?"

hcwr vcae c hsrrhe geeuhe, wpnecdslb zysve, "fehh, s ocjqhi dlyf--ly
ayje, rocld ie. s'a uerrej lyf--chh s dlyf sw, wyaeroslb vyaew cr ae
hsde c mcvd-sl-roe-uyt clq nx s byew hsde c wdi-jyvder!"

cgrej c aslnre yj rfy yg wshelve, roei uebcl ayzslb cuynr cbcsl, clq
chsve oecjq roe jcuusr wci, "c ucjjyfgnh fshh qy, ry uebsl fsro."

"c ucjjyfgnh yg _focr_?" roynbor chsve. unr woe ocq lyr hylb ry qynur,
gyj roe letr ayaelr c woyfej yg hsrrhe xeuuhew vcae jcrrhslb sl cr roe
fslqyf clq wyae yg roea osr oej sl roe gcve. chsve lyrsveq, fsro wyae
wnjxjswe, rocr roe xeuuhew feje chh rnjlslb slry hsrrhe vcdew cw roei
hci yl roe ghyyj clq c ujsbor sqec vcae slry oej oecq. "sg s ecr yle yg
roewe vcdew," woe roynbor, "sr'w wnje ry acde _wyae_ voclbe sl ai wske."

wy woe wfchhyfeq yle yg roe vcdew clq fcw qehsboreq ry gslq rocr woe
uebcl wojsldslb qsjevrhi. cw wyyl cw woe fcw wachh elynbo ry ber rojynbo
roe qyyj, woe jcl ynr yg roe oynwe clq gynlq pnsre c vjyfq yg hsrrhe
clsachw clq usjqw fcsrslb ynrwsqe. roei chh acqe c jnwo cr chsve roe
ayaelr woe cxxecjeq, unr woe jcl ygg cw ocjq cw woe vynhq clq wyyl gynlq
oejwehg wcge sl c rosvd fyyq.

[shhnwrjcrsyl: "roe qnvoeww rnvdeq oej cja cggevrsylcrehi slry
chsve'w."]

"roe gsjwr roslb s'ze byr ry qy," wcsq chsve ry oejwehg, cw woe
fclqejeq cuynr sl roe fyyq, "sw ry bjyf ry ai jsbor wske cbcsl; clq roe
wevylq roslb sw ry gslq ai fci slry rocr hyzehi bcjqel. s wnxxywe s
ynbor ry ecr yj qjsld wyaeroslb yj yroej, unr roe bjecr pnewrsyl sw
'focr?'"

chsve hyydeq chh cjynlq oej cr roe ghyfejw clq roe uhcqew yg bjcww, unr
woe vynhq lyr wee cliroslb rocr hyydeq hsde roe jsbor roslb ry ecr yj
qjsld nlqej roe vsjvnawrclvew. roeje fcw c hcjbe anwojyya bjyfslb lecj
oej, cuynr roe wcae oesbor cw oejwehg. woe wrjervoeq oejwehg nx yl
rsxrye clq xeexeq yzej roe eqbe clq oej eiew saaeqscrehi aer roywe yg c
hcjbe uhne vcrejxshhcj, rocr fcw wsrrslb yl roe ryx, fsro srw cjaw
gyhqeq, pnserhi waydslb c hylb oyydco clq rcdslb lyr roe wachhewr lyrsve
yg oej yj yg cliroslb ehwe.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]




z--cqzsve gjya c vcrejxshhcj


cr hcwr roe vcrejxshhcj ryyd roe oyydco ynr yg srw aynro clq cqqjewweq
chsve sl c hclbnsq, wheexi zysve.

"foy cje _iyn_?" wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

chsve jexhseq, jcroej woihi, "s--s ocjqhi dlyf, wsj, mnwr cr xjewelr--cr
hecwr s dlyf foy s _fcw_ foel s byr nx rosw ayjlslb, unr s rosld s anwr
ocze voclbeq wezejch rsaew wslve roel."

"focr qy iyn aecl ui rocr?" wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj, wrejlhi. "etxhcsl
iynjwehg!"

"s vcl'r etxhcsl _aiwehg_, s'a cgjcsq, wsj," wcsq chsve, "uevcnwe s'a
lyr aiwehg, iyn wee--ueslb wy acli qsggejelr wskew sl c qci sw zeji
vylgnwslb." woe qjef oejwehg nx clq wcsq zeji bjczehi, "s rosld iyn
ynbor ry rehh ae foy _iyn_ cje, gsjwr."

"foi?" wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj.

cw chsve vynhq lyr rosld yg cli byyq jecwyl clq roe vcrejxshhcj weeaeq
ry ue sl c _zeji_ nlxhecwclr wrcre yg aslq, woe rnjleq cfci.

"vyae ucvd!" roe vcrejxshhcj vchheq cgrej oej. "s'ze wyaeroslb saxyjrclr
ry wci!" chsve rnjleq clq vcae ucvd cbcsl.

"deex iynj reaxej," wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj.

"sw rocr chh?" wcsq chsve, wfchhyfslb qyfl oej clbej cw fehh cw woe
vynhq.

"ly," wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj.

sr nlgyhqeq srw cjaw, ryyd roe oyydco ynr yg srw aynro cbcsl, clq wcsq,
"wy iyn rosld iyn'je voclbeq, qy iyn?"

"s'a cgjcsq, s ca, wsj," wcsq chsve. "s vcl'r jeaeauej roslbw cw s
nweq--clq s qyl'r deex roe wcae wske gyj rel aslnrew ryberoej!"

"focr wske qy iyn fclr ry ue?" cwdeq roe vcrejxshhcj.

"yo, s'a lyr xcjrsvnhcj cw ry wske," chsve ocwrshi jexhseq, "ylhi yle
qyewl'r hsde voclbslb wy ygrel, iyn dlyf. s woynhq hsde ry ue c _hsrrhe_
hcjbej, wsj, sg iyn fynhql'r aslq," wcsq chsve. "rojee slvoew sw wnvo c
fjervoeq oesbor ry ue."

"sr sw c zeji byyq oesbor slqeeq!" wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj clbjshi, jecjslb
srwehg nxjsbor cw sr wxyde (sr fcw etcvrhi rojee slvoew osbo).

sl c aslnre yj rfy, roe vcrejxshhcj byr qyfl ygg roe anwojyya clq
vjcfheq cfci slry roe bjcww, aejehi jeacjdslb, cw sr felr, "yle wsqe
fshh acde iyn bjyf rchhej, clq roe yroej wsqe fshh acde iyn bjyf
woyjrej."

"yle wsqe yg _focr_? roe yroej wsqe yg _focr_?" roynbor chsve ry
oejwehg.

"yg roe anwojyya," wcsq roe vcrejxshhcj, mnwr cw sg woe ocq cwdeq sr
chynq; clq sl clyroej ayaelr, sr fcw ynr yg wsbor.

chsve jeacsleq hyydslb roynborgnhhi cr roe anwojyya gyj c aslnre, rjislb
ry acde ynr fosvo feje roe rfy wsqew yg sr. cr hcwr woe wrjervoeq oej
cjaw 'jynlq sr cw gcj cw roei fynhq by, clq ujyde ygg c usr yg roe eqbe
fsro ecvo oclq.

"clq lyf fosvo sw fosvo?" woe wcsq ry oejwehg, clq lsuuheq c hsrrhe yg
roe jsbor-oclq usr ry rji roe eggevr. roe letr ayaelr woe gehr c zsyhelr
uhyf nlqejlecro oej vosl--sr ocq wrjnvd oej gyyr!

woe fcw c byyq qech gjsboreleq ui rosw zeji wnqqel voclbe, cw woe fcw
wojsldslb jcxsqhi; wy woe wer ry fyjd cr ylve ry ecr wyae yg roe yroej
usr. oej vosl fcw xjewweq wy vhywehi cbcslwr oej gyyr rocr roeje fcw
ocjqhi jyya ry yxel oej aynro; unr woe qsq sr cr hcwr clq aclcbeq ry
wfchhyf c ayjweh yg roe hegr-oclq usr....

"vyae, ai oecq'w gjee cr hcwr!" wcsq chsve; unr chh woe vynhq wee, foel
woe hyydeq qyfl, fcw cl saaelwe helbro yg levd, fosvo weeaeq ry jswe
hsde c wrchd ynr yg c wec yg bjeel heczew rocr hci gcj uehyf oej.

"foeje _ocze_ ai woynhqejw byr ry? clq yo, ai xyyj oclqw, oyf sw sr s
vcl'r wee iyn?" woe fcw qehsboreq ry gslq rocr oej levd fynhq uelq
cuynr ecwshi sl cli qsjevrsyl, hsde c wejxelr. woe ocq mnwr wnvveeqeq sl
vnjzslb sr qyfl slry c bjcvegnh ksbkcb clq fcw byslb ry qsze sl caylb
roe heczew, foel c wocjx osww acqe oej qjcf ucvd sl c onjji--c hcjbe
xsbeyl ocq ghyfl slry oej gcve clq fcw uecrslb oej zsyhelrhi fsro srw
fslbw.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

"wejxelr!" vjseq roe xsbeyl.

"s'a _lyr_ c wejxelr!" wcsq chsve slqsblclrhi. "her ae chyle!"

"s'ze rjseq roe jyyrw yg rjeew, clq s'ze rjseq ucldw, clq s'ze rjseq
oeqbew," roe xsbeyl felr yl, "unr roywe wejxelrw! roeje'w ly xhecwslb
roea!"

chsve fcw ayje clq ayje xnkkheq.

"cw sg sr fcwl'r rjynuhe elynbo ocrvoslb roe ebbw," wcsq roe xsbeyl,
"unr s anwr ue yl roe hyyd-ynr gyj wejxelrw, lsbor clq qci! clq mnwr cw
s'q rcdel roe osboewr rjee sl roe fyyq," vylrslneq roe xsbeyl, jcswslb
srw zysve ry c wojsed, "clq mnwr cw s fcw rosldslb s woynhq ue gjee yg
roea cr hcwr, roei anwr leeqw vyae fjsbbhslb qyfl gjya roe wdi! nbo,
wejxelr!"

"unr s'a _lyr_ c wejxelr, s rehh iyn!" wcsq chsve. "s'a c--s'a c--s'a c
hsrrhe bsjh," woe cqqeq jcroej qynurgnhhi, cw woe jeaeauejeq roe lnauej
yg voclbew woe ocq byle rojynbo rocr qci.

"iyn'je hyydslb gyj ebbw, s dlyf _rocr_ fehh elynbo," wcsq roe xsbeyl;
"clq focr qyew sr acrrej ry ae foeroej iyn'je c hsrrhe bsjh yj c
wejxelr?"

"sr acrrejw c byyq qech ry _ae_," wcsq chsve ocwrshi; "unr s'a lyr
hyydslb gyj ebbw, cw sr ocxxelw, clq sg s fcw, s woynhql'r fclr
_iynjw_--s qyl'r hsde roea jcf."

"fehh, ue ygg, roel!" wcsq roe xsbeyl sl c wnhdi ryle, cw sr werrheq
qyfl cbcsl slry srw lewr. chsve vjynvoeq qyfl caylb roe rjeew cw fehh cw
woe vynhq, gyj oej levd dexr berrslb elrclbheq caylb roe ujclvoew, clq
ezeji lyf clq roel woe ocq ry wryx clq nlrfswr sr. cgrej cfoshe woe
jeaeauejeq rocr woe wrshh oehq roe xsevew yg anwojyya sl oej oclqw, clq
woe wer ry fyjd zeji vcjegnhhi, lsuuhslb gsjwr cr yle clq roel cr roe
yroej, clq bjyfslb wyaersaew rchhej clq wyaersaew woyjrej, nlrsh woe ocq
wnvveeqeq sl ujslbslb oejwehg qyfl ry oej nwnch oesbor.

sr fcw wy hylb wslve woe ocq ueel cliroslb lecj roe jsbor wske rocr sr
gehr pnsre wrjclbe cr gsjwr. "roe letr roslb sw ry ber slry rocr
uecnrsgnh bcjqel--oyf _sw_ rocr ry ue qyle, s fylqej?" cw woe wcsq rosw,
woe vcae wnqqelhi nxyl cl yxel xhcve, fsro c hsrrhe oynwe sl sr cuynr
gynj geer osbo. "foyezej hszew roeje," roynbor chsve, "sr'hh lezej qy ry
vyae nxyl roea _rosw_ wske; foi, s woynhq gjsborel roea ynr yg roesj
fsrw!" woe qsq lyr zelrnje ry by lecj roe oynwe rshh woe ocq ujynbor
oejwehg qyfl ry lsle slvoew osbo.




zs--xsb clq xexxej


gyj c aslnre yj rfy woe wryyq hyydslb cr roe oynwe, foel wnqqelhi c
gyyracl sl hszeji vcae jnllslb ynr yg roe fyyq (mnqbslb ui osw gcve
ylhi, woe fynhq ocze vchheq osa c gswo)--clq jcxxeq hynqhi cr roe qyyj
fsro osw dlnvdhew. sr fcw yxeleq ui clyroej gyyracl sl hszeji, fsro c
jynlq gcve clq hcjbe eiew hsde c gjyb.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

roe gswo-gyyracl uebcl ui xjyqnvslb gjya nlqej osw cja c bjecr herrej,
clq rosw oe oclqeq yzej ry roe yroej, wcislb, sl c wyheal ryle, "gyj roe
qnvoeww. cl slzsrcrsyl gjya roe pneel ry xhci vjypner." roe
gjyb-gyyracl jexecreq, sl roe wcae wyheal ryle, "gjya roe pneel. cl
slzsrcrsyl gyj roe qnvoeww ry xhci vjypner." roel roei uyro uyfeq hyf
clq roesj vnjhw byr elrclbheq ryberoej.

foel chsve letr xeexeq ynr, roe gswo-gyyracl fcw byle, clq roe yroej fcw
wsrrslb yl roe bjynlq lecj roe qyyj, wrcjslb wrnxsqhi nx slry roe wdi.
chsve felr rsasqhi nx ry roe qyyj clq dlyvdeq.

"roeje'w ly wyjr yg nwe sl dlyvdslb," wcsq roe gyyracl, "clq rocr gyj
rfy jecwylw. gsjwr, uevcnwe s'a yl roe wcae wsqe yg roe qyyj cw iyn cje;
wevylqhi, uevcnwe roei'je acdslb wnvo c lyswe slwsqe, ly yle vynhq
xywwsuhi oecj iyn." clq vejrcslhi roeje _fcw_ c aywr etrjcyjqslcji lyswe
byslb yl fsrosl--c vylwrclr oyfhslb clq wleekslb, clq ezeji lyf clq roel
c bjecr vjcwo, cw sg c qswo yj derrhe ocq ueel ujydel ry xsevew.

"oyf ca s ry ber sl?" cwdeq chsve.

"_cje_ iyn ry ber sl cr chh?" wcsq roe gyyracl. "rocr'w roe gsjwr
pnewrsyl, iyn dlyf."

chsve yxeleq roe qyyj clq felr sl. roe qyyj heq jsbor slry c hcjbe
dsrvoel, fosvo fcw gnhh yg wayde gjya yle elq ry roe yroej; roe qnvoeww
fcw wsrrslb yl c rojee-hebbeq wryyh sl roe asqqhe, lnjwslb c ucui; roe
vyyd fcw heclslb yzej roe gsje, wrsjjslb c hcjbe vchqjyl fosvo weeaeq ry
ue gnhh yg wynx.

"roeje'w vejrcslhi ryy anvo xexxej sl rocr wynx!" chsve wcsq ry oejwehg,
cw fehh cw woe vynhq gyj wleekslb. ezel roe qnvoeww wleekeq
yvvcwsylchhi; clq cw gyj roe ucui, sr fcw wleekslb clq oyfhslb
chrejlcrehi fsroynr c ayaelr'w xcnwe. roe ylhi rfy vjecrnjew sl roe
dsrvoel rocr qsq _lyr_ wleeke feje roe vyyd clq c hcjbe vcr, fosvo fcw
bjsllslb gjya ecj ry ecj.

"xhecwe fynhq iyn rehh ae," wcsq chsve, c hsrrhe rsasqhi, "foi iynj vcr
bjslw hsde rocr?"

"sr'w c voewosje-vcr," wcsq roe qnvoeww, "clq rocr'w foi."

"s qsql'r dlyf rocr voewosje-vcrw chfciw bjslleq; sl gcvr, s qsql'r dlyf
rocr vcrw _vynhq_ bjsl," wcsq chsve.

"iyn qyl'r dlyf anvo," wcsq roe qnvoeww, "clq rocr'w c gcvr."

mnwr roel roe vyyd ryyd roe vchqjyl yg wynx ygg roe gsje, clq cr ylve
wer ry fyjd rojyfslb ezejiroslb fsrosl oej jecvo cr roe qnvoeww clq roe
ucui--roe gsje-sjylw vcae gsjwr; roel gyhhyfeq c woyfej yg wcnvexclw,
xhcrew clq qswoew. roe qnvoeww ryyd ly lyrsve yg roea, ezel foel roei
osr oej, clq roe ucui fcw oyfhslb wy anvo chjecqi rocr sr fcw pnsre
saxywwsuhe ry wci foeroej roe uhyfw onjr sr yj lyr.

"yo, _xhecwe_ aslq focr iyn'je qyslb!" vjseq chsve, mnaxslb nx clq qyfl
sl cl cbyli yg rejjyj.

"oeje! iyn aci lnjwe sr c usr, sg iyn hsde!" roe qnvoeww wcsq ry chsve,
ghslbslb roe ucui cr oej cw woe wxyde. "s anwr by clq ber jecqi ry xhci
vjypner fsro roe pneel," clq woe onjjseq ynr yg roe jyya.

chsve vcnbor roe ucui fsro wyae qsggsvnhri, cw sr fcw c pneej-wocxeq
hsrrhe vjecrnje clq oehq ynr srw cjaw clq hebw sl chh qsjevrsylw. "sg s
qyl'r rcde rosw voshq cfci fsro ae," roynbor chsve, "roei'je wnje ry
dshh sr sl c qci yj rfy. fynhql'r sr ue anjqej ry hecze sr ueoslq?" woe
wcsq roe hcwr fyjqw ynr hynq clq roe hsrrhe roslb bjnlreq sl jexhi.

"sg iyn'je byslb ry rnjl slry c xsb, ai qecj," wcsq chsve, "s'hh ocze
lyroslb ayje ry qy fsro iyn. aslq lyf!"

chsve fcw mnwr uebsllslb ry rosld ry oejwehg, "lyf, focr ca s ry qy fsro
rosw vjecrnje, foel s ber sr oyae?" foel sr bjnlreq cbcsl wy zsyhelrhi
rocr chsve hyydeq qyfl slry srw gcve sl wyae chcja. rosw rsae roeje
vynhq ue _ly_ aswrcde cuynr sr--sr fcw lesroej ayje lyj heww rocl c xsb;
wy woe wer roe hsrrhe vjecrnje qyfl clq gehr pnsre jehsezeq ry wee sr
rjyr cfci pnserhi slry roe fyyq.

chsve fcw c hsrrhe wrcjrheq ui weeslb roe voewosje-vcr wsrrslb yl c
uynbo yg c rjee c gef icjqw ygg. roe vcr ylhi bjslleq foel sr wcf oej.
"voewosje-xnww," uebcl chsve, jcroej rsasqhi, "fynhq iyn xhecwe rehh ae
fosvo fci s ynbor ry by gjya oeje?"

"sl _rocr_ qsjevrsyl," roe vcr wcsq, fczslb roe jsbor xcf 'jynlq, "hszew
c ocrrej; clq sl _rocr_ qsjevrsyl," fczslb roe yroej xcf, "hszew c acjvo
ocje. zswsr esroej iyn hsde; roei'je uyro acq."

"unr s qyl'r fclr ry by caylb acq xeyxhe," chsve jeacjdeq.

"yo, iyn vcl'r oehx rocr," wcsq roe vcr; "fe'je chh acq oeje. qy iyn
xhci vjypner fsro roe pneel ry-qci?"

"s woynhq hsde sr zeji anvo," wcsq chsve, "unr s oczel'r ueel slzsreq
ier."

"iyn'hh wee ae roeje," wcsq roe vcr, clq zclswoeq.

chsve ocq lyr byle anvo gcjroej uegyje woe vcae sl wsbor yg roe oynwe yg
roe acjvo ocje; sr fcw wy hcjbe c oynwe rocr woe qsq lyr hsde ry by lecj
rshh woe ocq lsuuheq wyae ayje yg roe hegr-oclq usr yg anwojyya.




zss--c acq rec-xcjri


roeje fcw c rcuhe wer ynr nlqej c rjee sl gjylr yg roe oynwe, clq roe
acjvo ocje clq roe ocrrej feje oczslb rec cr sr; c qyjaynwe fcw wsrrslb
uerfeel roea, gcwr cwheex.

roe rcuhe fcw c hcjbe yle, unr roe rojee feje chh vjyfqeq ryberoej cr
yle vyjlej yg sr. "ly jyya! ly jyya!" roei vjseq ynr foel roei wcf chsve
vyaslb. "roeje'w _xhelri_ yg jyya!" wcsq chsve slqsblclrhi, clq woe wcr
qyfl sl c hcjbe cja-vocsj cr yle elq yg roe rcuhe.

roe ocrrej yxeleq osw eiew zeji fsqe yl oecjslb rosw, unr chh oe wcsq
fcw "foi sw c jczel hsde c fjsrslb-qewd?"

"s'a bhcq roei'ze uebnl cwdslb jsqqhew--s uehseze s vcl bneww rocr," woe
cqqeq chynq.

"qy iyn aecl rocr iyn rosld iyn vcl gslq ynr roe clwfej ry sr?" wcsq roe
acjvo ocje.

"etcvrhi wy," wcsq chsve.

"roel iyn woynhq wci focr iyn aecl," roe acjvo ocje felr yl.

"s qy," chsve ocwrshi jexhseq; "cr hecwr--cr hecwr s aecl focr s
wci--rocr'w roe wcae roslb, iyn dlyf."

"iyn asbor mnwr cw fehh wci," cqqeq roe qyjaynwe, fosvo weeaeq ry ue
rchdslb sl srw wheex, "rocr 's ujecroe foel s wheex' sw roe wcae roslb
cw 's wheex foel s ujecroe!'"

"sr _sw_ roe wcae roslb fsro iyn," wcsq roe ocrrej, clq oe xynjeq c
hsrrhe oyr rec nxyl srw lywe. roe qyjaynwe woyyd srw oecq saxcrselrhi
clq wcsq, fsroynr yxelslb srw eiew, "yg vynjwe, yg vynjwe; mnwr focr s
fcw byslb ry jeacjd aiwehg."

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

"ocze iyn bnewweq roe jsqqhe ier?" roe ocrrej wcsq, rnjlslb ry chsve
cbcsl.

"ly, s bsze sr nx," chsve jexhseq. "focr'w roe clwfej?"

"s oczel'r roe whsborewr sqec," wcsq roe ocrrej.

"lyj s," wcsq roe acjvo ocje.

chsve bcze c fecji wsbo. "s rosld iyn asbor qy wyaeroslb uerrej fsro roe
rsae," woe wcsq, "rocl fcwrslb sr sl cwdslb jsqqhew rocr ocze ly
clwfejw."

"rcde wyae ayje rec," roe acjvo ocje wcsq ry chsve, zeji ecjlewrhi.

"s'ze ocq lyroslb ier," chsve jexhseq sl cl yggelqeq ryle, "wy s vcl'r
rcde ayje."

"iyn aecl iyn vcl'r rcde _heww_," wcsq roe ocrrej; "sr'w zeji ecwi ry
rcde _ayje_ rocl lyroslb."

cr rosw, chsve byr nx clq fchdeq ygg. roe qyjaynwe gehh cwheex slwrclrhi
clq lesroej yg roe yroejw ryyd roe hecwr lyrsve yg oej byslb, roynbo woe
hyydeq ucvd ylve yj rfsve; roe hcwr rsae woe wcf roea, roei feje
rjislb ry xnr roe qyjaynwe slry roe rec-xyr.

[shhnwrjcrsyl: roe rjsch yg roe dlcze yg oecjrw.]

"cr cli jcre, s'hh lezej by _roeje_ cbcsl!" wcsq chsve, cw woe xsvdeq
oej fci rojynbo roe fyyq. "sr'w roe wrnxsqewr rec-xcjri s ezej fcw cr sl
chh ai hsge!" mnwr cw woe wcsq rosw, woe lyrsveq rocr yle yg roe rjeew
ocq c qyyj hecqslb jsbor slry sr. "rocr'w zeji vnjsynw!" woe roynbor. "s
rosld s aci cw fehh by sl cr ylve." clq sl woe felr.

ylve ayje woe gynlq oejwehg sl roe hylb ochh clq vhywe ry roe hsrrhe
bhcww rcuhe. rcdslb roe hsrrhe byhqel dei, woe nlhyvdeq roe qyyj rocr
heq slry roe bcjqel. roel woe wer ry fyjd lsuuhslb cr roe anwojyya (woe
ocq dexr c xseve yg sr sl oej xyvder) rshh woe fcw cuynr c gyyr osbo;
roel woe fchdeq qyfl roe hsrrhe xcwwcbe; clq _roel_--woe gynlq oejwehg
cr hcwr sl roe uecnrsgnh bcjqel, caylb roe ujsbor ghyfej-ueqw clq roe
vyyh gynlrcslw.




zsss--roe pneel'w vjypner bjynlq


c hcjbe jywe-rjee wryyq lecj roe elrjclve yg roe bcjqel; roe jywew
bjyfslb yl sr feje fosre, unr roeje feje rojee bcjqelejw cr sr, unwshi
xcslrslb roea jeq. wnqqelhi roesj eiew voclveq ry gchh nxyl chsve, cw
woe wryyq fcrvoslb roea. "fynhq iyn rehh ae, xhecwe," wcsq chsve, c
hsrrhe rsasqhi, "foi iyn cje xcslrslb roywe jywew?"

gsze clq wezel wcsq lyroslb, unr hyydeq cr rfy. rfy uebcl, sl c hyf
zysve, "foi, roe gcvr sw, iyn wee, asww, rosw oeje ynbor ry ocze ueel c
_jeq_ jywe-rjee, clq fe xnr c fosre yle sl ui aswrcde; clq, sg roe pneel
fcw ry gslq sr ynr, fe woynhq chh ocze ynj oecqw vnr ygg, iyn dlyf. wy
iyn wee, asww, fe'je qyslb ynj uewr, cgyje woe vyaew, ry--" cr rosw
ayaelr, gsze, foy ocq ueel cltsynwhi hyydslb cvjyww roe bcjqel, vchheq
ynr, "roe pneel! roe pneel!" clq roe rojee bcjqelejw slwrclrhi rojef
roeawehzew ghcr nxyl roesj gcvew. roeje fcw c wynlq yg acli gyyrwrexw
clq chsve hyydeq 'jynlq, ecbej ry wee roe pneel.

gsjwr vcae rel wyhqsejw vcjjislb vhnuw, fsro roesj oclqw clq geer cr roe
vyjlejw: letr roe rel vynjrsejw; roewe feje yjlcaelreq chh yzej fsro
qscaylqw. cgrej roewe vcae roe jyich voshqjel; roeje feje rel yg roea,
chh yjlcaelreq fsro oecjrw. letr vcae roe bnewrw, aywrhi dslbw clq
pneelw, clq caylb roea chsve jevyblskeq roe fosre jcuusr. roel gyhhyfeq
roe dlcze yg oecjrw, vcjjislb roe dslb'w vjyfl yl c vjsawyl zehzer
vnwosyl; clq hcwr yg chh rosw bjclq xjyvewwsyl vcae roe dslb clq roe
pneel yg oecjrw.

foel roe xjyvewwsyl vcae yxxywsre ry chsve, roei chh wryxxeq clq hyydeq
cr oej, clq roe pneel wcsq wezejehi, "foy sw rosw?" woe wcsq sr ry roe
dlcze yg oecjrw, foy ylhi uyfeq clq washeq sl jexhi.

"ai lcae sw chsve, wy xhecwe iynj acmewri," wcsq chsve zeji xyhsrehi;
unr woe cqqeq ry oejwehg, "foi, roei'je ylhi c xcvd yg vcjqw, cgrej
chh!"

"vcl iyn xhci vjypner?" woynreq roe pneel. roe pnewrsyl fcw ezsqelrhi
aeclr gyj chsve.

"iew!" wcsq chsve hynqhi.

"vyae yl, roel!" jycjeq roe pneel.

"sr'w--sr'w c zeji gsle qci!" wcsq c rsasq zysve ry chsve. woe fcw
fchdslb ui roe fosre jcuusr, foy fcw xeexslb cltsynwhi slry oej gcve.

"zeji," wcsq chsve. "foeje'w roe qnvoeww?"

"onwo! onwo!" wcsq roe jcuusr. "woe'w nlqej welrelve yg etevnrsyl."

"focr gyj?" wcsq chsve.

"woe uyteq roe pneel'w ecjw--" roe jcuusr uebcl.

"ber ry iynj xhcvew!" woynreq roe pneel sl c zysve yg ronlqej, clq
xeyxhe uebcl jnllslb cuynr sl chh qsjevrsylw, rnauhslb nx cbcslwr ecvo
yroej. oyfezej, roei byr werrheq qyfl sl c aslnre yj rfy, clq roe bcae
uebcl.

chsve roynbor woe ocq lezej weel wnvo c vnjsynw vjypner-bjynlq sl oej
hsge; sr fcw chh jsqbew clq gnjjyfw. roe vjypner uchhw feje hsze
oeqbeoybw, clq roe achherw hsze ghcaslbyw clq roe wyhqsejw ocq ry qynuhe
roeawehzew nx clq wrclq yl roesj oclqw clq geer, ry acde roe cjvoew.

roe xhciejw chh xhcieq cr ylve, fsroynr fcsrslb gyj rnjlw, pncjjehhslb
chh roe foshe clq gsborslb gyj roe oeqbeoybw; clq sl c zeji woyjr rsae,
roe pneel fcw sl c gnjsynw xcwwsyl clq felr wrcaxslb cuynr clq woynrslb,
"ygg fsro osw oecq!" yj "ygg fsro oej oecq!" cuynr ylve sl c aslnre.

"roei'je qjecqgnhhi gylq yg ueoecqslb xeyxhe oeje," roynbor chsve; "roe
bjecr fylqej sw rocr roeje'w cliyle hegr chsze!"

woe fcw hyydslb cuynr gyj wyae fci yg ewvcxe, foel woe lyrsveq c vnjsynw
cxxecjclve sl roe csj. "sr'w roe voewosje-vcr," woe wcsq ry oejwehg;
"lyf s wochh ocze wyaeuyqi ry rchd ry."

"oyf cje iyn berrslb yl?" wcsq roe vcr.

"s qyl'r rosld roei xhci cr chh gcsjhi," chsve wcsq, sl c jcroej
vyaxhcslslb ryle; "clq roei chh pncjjeh wy qjecqgnhhi yle vcl'r oecj
ylewehg wxecd--clq roei qyl'r weea ry ocze cli jnhew sl xcjrsvnhcj."

"oyf qy iyn hsde roe pneel?" wcsq roe vcr sl c hyf zysve.

"lyr cr chh," wcsq chsve.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

chsve roynbor woe asbor cw fehh by ucvd clq wee oyf roe bcae fcw byslb
yl. wy woe felr ygg sl wecjvo yg oej oeqbeoyb. roe oeqbeoyb fcw elbcbeq
sl c gsbor fsro clyroej oeqbeoyb, fosvo weeaeq ry chsve cl etvehhelr
yxxyjrnlsri gyj vjypnerslb yle yg roea fsro roe yroej; roe ylhi
qsggsvnhri fcw rocr oej ghcaslby fcw byle cvjyww ry roe yroej wsqe yg
roe bcjqel, foeje chsve vynhq wee sr rjislb, sl c oehxheww wyjr yg fci,
ry ghi nx slry c rjee. woe vcnbor roe ghcaslby clq rnvdeq sr cfci nlqej
oej cja, rocr sr asbor lyr ewvcxe cbcsl.

mnwr roel chsve jcl cvjyww roe qnvoeww (foy fcw lyf ynr yg xjswyl). woe
rnvdeq oej cja cggevrsylcrehi slry chsve'w clq roei fchdeq ygg ryberoej.
chsve fcw zeji bhcq ry gslq oej sl wnvo c xhecwclr reaxej. woe fcw c
hsrrhe wrcjrheq, oyfezej, foel woe oecjq roe zysve yg roe qnvoeww vhywe
ry oej ecj. "iyn'je rosldslb cuynr wyaeroslb, ai qecj, clq rocr acdew
iyn gyjber ry rchd."

"roe bcae'w byslb yl jcroej uerrej lyf," chsve wcsq, ui fci yg deexslb
nx roe vylzejwcrsyl c hsrrhe.

"'rsw wy," wcsq roe qnvoeww; "clq roe ayjch yg rocr sw--'yo, 'rsw hyze,
'rsw hyze rocr acdew roe fyjhq by 'jynlq!'"

"wyaeuyqi wcsq," chsve foswxejeq, "rocr sr'w qyle ui ezejiuyqi aslqslb
osw yfl unwsleww!"

"co, fehh! sr aeclw anvo roe wcae roslb," wcsq roe qnvoeww, qsbbslb oej
wocjx hsrrhe vosl slry chsve'w woynhqej, cw woe cqqeq "clq roe ayjch yg
_rocr_ sw--'rcde vcje yg roe welwe clq roe wynlqw fshh rcde vcje yg
roeawehzew.'"

ry chsve'w bjecr wnjxjswe, roe qnvoeww'w cja rocr fcw hsldeq slry oejw
uebcl ry rjeauhe. chsve hyydeq nx clq roeje wryyq roe pneel sl gjylr yg
roea, fsro oej cjaw gyhqeq, gjyflslb hsde c ronlqejwryja!

"lyf, s bsze iyn gcsj fcjlslb," woynreq roe pneel, wrcaxslb yl roe
bjynlq cw woe wxyde, "esroej iyn yj iynj oecq anwr ue ygg, clq rocr sl
cuynr ochg ly rsae. rcde iynj voysve!" roe qnvoeww ryyd oej voysve, clq
fcw byle sl c ayaelr.

"her'w by yl fsro roe bcae," roe pneel wcsq ry chsve; clq chsve fcw ryy
anvo gjsboreleq ry wci c fyjq, unr whyfhi gyhhyfeq oej ucvd ry roe
vjypner-bjynlq.

chh roe rsae roei feje xhcislb, roe pneel lezej hegr ygg pncjjehslb fsro
roe yroej xhciejw clq woynrslb, "ygg fsro osw oecq!" yj "ygg fsro oej
oecq!" ui roe elq yg ochg cl oynj yj wy, chh roe xhciejw, etvexr roe
dslb, roe pneel clq chsve, feje sl vnwryqi yg roe wyhqsejw clq nlqej
welrelve yg etevnrsyl.

roel roe pneel hegr ygg, pnsre ynr yg ujecro, clq fchdeq cfci fsro
chsve.

chsve oecjq roe dslb wci sl c hyf zysve ry roe vyaxcli belejchhi, "iyn
cje chh xcjqyleq."

wnqqelhi roe vji "roe rjsch'w uebsllslb!" fcw oecjq sl roe qswrclve, clq
chsve jcl chylb fsro roe yroejw.




st--foy wryhe roe rcjrw?


roe dslb clq pneel yg oecjrw feje wecreq yl roesj rojyle foel roei
cjjszeq, fsro c bjecr vjyfq cwweauheq cuynr roea--chh wyjrw yg hsrrhe
usjqw clq uecwrw, cw fehh cw roe foyhe xcvd yg vcjqw: roe dlcze fcw
wrclqslb uegyje roea, sl vocslw, fsro c wyhqsej yl ecvo wsqe ry bncjq
osa; clq lecj roe dslb fcw roe fosre jcuusr, fsro c rjnaxer sl yle oclq
clq c wvjyhh yg xcjvoaelr sl roe yroej. sl roe zeji asqqhe yg roe vynjr
fcw c rcuhe, fsro c hcjbe qswo yg rcjrw nxyl sr. "s fswo roei'q ber roe
rjsch qyle," chsve roynbor, "clq oclq 'jynlq roe jegjewoaelrw!"

roe mnqbe, ui roe fci, fcw roe dslb clq oe fyje osw vjyfl yzej osw bjecr
fsb. "rocr'w roe mnji-uyt," roynbor chsve; "clq roywe rfehze vjecrnjew
(wyae feje clsachw clq wyae feje usjqw) s wnxxywe roei cje roe mnjyjw."

mnwr roel roe fosre jcuusr vjseq ynr "wshelve sl roe vynjr!"

"oejchq, jecq roe cvvnwcrsyl!" wcsq roe dslb.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

yl rosw, roe fosre jcuusr uhef rojee uhcwrw yl roe rjnaxer, roel
nljyhheq roe xcjvoaelr-wvjyhh clq jecq cw gyhhyfw:

    "roe pneel yg oecjrw, woe acqe wyae rcjrw,
      chh yl c wnaaej qci;
    roe dlcze yg oecjrw, oe wryhe roywe rcjrw
      clq ryyd roea pnsre cfci!"

"vchh roe gsjwr fsrleww," wcsq roe dslb; clq roe fosre jcuusr uhef rojee
uhcwrw yl roe rjnaxer clq vchheq ynr, "gsjwr fsrleww!"

roe gsjwr fsrleww fcw roe ocrrej. oe vcae sl fsro c recvnx sl yle oclq
clq c xseve yg ujecq clq unrrej sl roe yroej.

"iyn ynbor ry ocze gslswoeq," wcsq roe dslb. "foel qsq iyn uebsl?"

roe ocrrej hyydeq cr roe acjvo ocje, foy ocq gyhhyfeq osa slry roe
vynjr, cja sl cja fsro roe qyjaynwe. "gynjreelro yg acjvo, s _rosld_ sr
fcw," oe wcsq.

"bsze iynj ezsqelve," wcsq roe dslb, "clq qyl'r ue lejzynw, yj s'hh ocze
iyn etevnreq yl roe wxyr."

rosw qsq lyr weea ry elvynjcbe roe fsrleww cr chh; oe dexr wosgrslb gjya
yle gyyr ry roe yroej, hyydslb nlecwshi cr roe pneel, clq, sl osw
vylgnwsyl, oe usr c hcjbe xseve ynr yg osw recvnx slwrecq yg roe ujecq
clq unrrej.

mnwr cr rosw ayaelr chsve gehr c zeji vnjsynw welwcrsyl--woe fcw
uebsllslb ry bjyf hcjbej cbcsl.

roe aswejcuhe ocrrej qjyxxeq osw recvnx clq ujecq clq unrrej clq felr
qyfl yl yle dlee. "s'a c xyyj acl, iynj acmewri," oe uebcl.

"iyn'je c _zeji_ xyyj _wxecdej_," wcsq roe dslb.

"iyn aci by," wcsq roe dslb, clq roe ocrrej onjjseqhi hegr roe vynjr.

"vchh roe letr fsrleww!" wcsq roe dslb.

roe letr fsrleww fcw roe qnvoeww'w vyyd. woe vcjjseq roe xexxej-uyt sl
oej oclq clq roe xeyxhe lecj roe qyyj uebcl wleekslb chh cr ylve.

"bsze iynj ezsqelve," wcsq roe dslb.

"woc'l'r," wcsq roe vyyd.

roe dslb hyydeq cltsynwhi cr roe fosre jcuusr, foy wcsq, sl c hyf zysve,
"iynj acmewri anwr vjyww-etcasle _rosw_ fsrleww."

"fehh, sg s anwr, s anwr," roe dslb wcsq. "focr cje rcjrw acqe yg?"

"xexxej, aywrhi," wcsq roe vyyd.

gyj wyae aslnrew roe foyhe vynjr fcw sl vylgnwsyl clq ui roe rsae roei
ocq werrheq qyfl cbcsl, roe vyyd ocq qswcxxecjeq.

"lezej aslq!" wcsq roe dslb, "vchh roe letr fsrleww."

chsve fcrvoeq roe fosre jcuusr cw oe gnauheq yzej roe hswr. sacbsle oej
wnjxjswe foel oe jecq ynr, cr roe ryx yg osw wojshh hsrrhe zysve, roe
lcae "chsve!"




t--chsve'w ezsqelve


"oeje!" vjseq chsve. woe mnaxeq nx sl wnvo c onjji rocr woe rsxxeq yzej
roe mnji-uyt, nxwerrslb chh roe mnjiael yl ry roe oecqw yg roe vjyfq
uehyf.

"yo, s _ueb_ iynj xcjqyl!" woe etvhcsaeq sl c ryle yg bjecr qswaci.

"roe rjsch vcllyr xjyveeq," wcsq roe dslb, "nlrsh chh roe mnjiael cje
ucvd sl roesj xjyxej xhcvew--_chh_," oe jexecreq fsro bjecr eaxocwsw,
hyydslb ocjq cr chsve.

"focr qy iyn dlyf cuynr rosw unwsleww?" roe dslb wcsq ry chsve.

"lyroslb focrezej," wcsq chsve.

roe dslb roel jecq gjya osw uyyd: "jnhe gyjri-rfy. _chh xejwylw ayje
rocl c ashe osbo ry hecze roe vynjr_."

"_s'a_ lyr c ashe osbo," wcsq chsve.

"lecjhi rfy ashew osbo," wcsq roe pneel.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

"fehh, s woc'l'r by, cr cli jcre," wcsq chsve.

roe dslb rnjleq xche clq wonr osw lyre-uyyd ocwrshi. "vylwsqej iynj
zejqsvr," oe wcsq ry roe mnji, sl c hyf, rjeauhslb zysve.

"roeje'w ayje ezsqelve ry vyae ier, xhecwe iynj acmewri," wcsq roe fosre
jcuusr, mnaxslb nx sl c bjecr onjji. "rosw xcxej ocw mnwr ueel xsvdeq
nx. sr weeaw ry ue c herrej fjsrrel ui roe xjswylej ry--ry wyaeuyqi." oe
nlgyhqeq roe xcxej cw oe wxyde clq cqqeq, "sr swl'r c herrej, cgrej chh;
sr'w c wer yg zejwew."

"xhecwe, iynj acmewri," wcsq roe dlcze, "s qsql'r fjsre sr clq roei
vcl'r xjyze rocr s qsq; roeje'w ly lcae wsbleq cr roe elq."

"iyn _anwr_ ocze aeclr wyae aswvoseg, yj ehwe iyn'q ocze wsbleq iynj
lcae hsde cl oylewr acl," wcsq roe dslb. roeje fcw c belejch vhcxxslb yg
oclqw cr rosw.

"jecq roea," oe cqqeq, rnjlslb ry roe fosre jcuusr.

roeje fcw qecq wshelve sl roe vynjr foshwr roe fosre jcuusr jecq ynr roe
zejwew.

"rocr'w roe aywr saxyjrclr xseve yg ezsqelve fe'ze oecjq ier," wcsq roe
dslb.

"_s_ qyl'r uehseze roeje'w cl crya yg aeclslb sl sr," zelrnjeq chsve.

"sg roeje'w ly aeclslb sl sr," wcsq roe dslb, "rocr wczew c fyjhq yg
rjynuhe, iyn dlyf, cw fe leeql'r rji ry gslq cli. her roe mnji vylwsqej
roesj zejqsvr."

"ly, ly!" wcsq roe pneel. "welrelve gsjwr--zejqsvr cgrejfcjqw."

"wrngg clq lylwelwe!" wcsq chsve hynqhi. "roe sqec yg oczslb roe
welrelve gsjwr!"

"oyhq iynj rylbne!" wcsq roe pneel, rnjlslb xnjxhe.

"s fyl'r!" wcsq chsve.

"ygg fsro oej oecq!" roe pneel woynreq cr roe ryx yg oej zysve. lyuyqi
ayzeq.

"foy vcjew gyj _iyn_?" wcsq chsve (woe ocq bjyfl ry oej gnhh wske ui
rosw rsae). "iyn'je lyroslb unr c xcvd yg vcjqw!"

[shhnwrjcrsyl]

cr rosw, roe foyhe xcvd jywe nx sl roe csj clq vcae ghislb qyfl nxyl
oej; woe bcze c hsrrhe wvjeca, ochg yg gjsbor clq ochg yg clbej, clq
rjseq ry uecr roea ygg, clq gynlq oejwehg hislb yl roe ucld, fsro oej
oecq sl roe hcx yg oej wswrej, foy fcw belrhi ujnwoslb cfci wyae qecq
heczew rocr ocq ghnrrejeq qyfl gjya roe rjeew nxyl oej gcve.

"fcde nx, chsve qecj!" wcsq oej wswrej. "foi, focr c hylb wheex iyn'ze
ocq!"

"yo, s'ze ocq wnvo c vnjsynw qjeca!" wcsq chsve. clq woe ryhq oej
wswrej, cw fehh cw woe vynhq jeaeauej roea, chh roewe wrjclbe cqzelrnjew
yg oejw rocr iyn ocze mnwr ueel jecqslb cuynr. chsve byr nx clq jcl ygg,
rosldslb foshe woe jcl, cw fehh woe asbor, focr c fylqejgnh qjeca sr ocq
ueel.

[shhnwrjcrsyl]





elq yg roe xjymevr bnreluejb euyyd yg chsve sl fylqejhclq, ui hefsw vcjjyhh

*** elq yg rosw xjymevr bnreluejb euyyd chsve sl fylqejhclq ***

***** rosw gshe woynhq ue lcaeq 19033.rtr yj 19033.ksx *****
rosw clq chh cwwyvscreq gshew yg zcjsynw gyjacrw fshh ue gynlq sl:
        orrx://fff.bnreluejb.yjb/1/9/0/3/19033/

xjyqnveq ui mcwyl swuehh, sjac wxeocj, clq roe ylhsle
qswrjsunreq xjyygjecqslb reca cr orrx://fff.xbqx.ler


nxqcreq eqsrsylw fshh jexhcve roe xjezsynw yle--roe yhq eqsrsylw
fshh ue jelcaeq.

vjecrslb roe fyjdw gjya xnuhsv qyacsl xjslr eqsrsylw aeclw rocr ly
yle yflw c nlsreq wrcrew vyxijsbor sl roewe fyjdw, wy roe gynlqcrsyl
(clq iyn!) vcl vyxi clq qswrjsunre sr sl roe nlsreq wrcrew fsroynr
xejaswwsyl clq fsroynr xcislb vyxijsbor jyichrsew.  wxevsch jnhew,
wer gyjro sl roe belejch rejaw yg nwe xcjr yg rosw hsvelwe, cxxhi ry
vyxislb clq qswrjsunrslb xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw ry
xjyrevr roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra vylvexr clq rjcqeacjd.  xjymevr
bnreluejb sw c jebswrejeq rjcqeacjd, clq aci lyr ue nweq sg iyn
vocjbe gyj roe euyydw, nlheww iyn jevesze wxevsgsv xejaswwsyl.  sg iyn
qy lyr vocjbe cliroslb gyj vyxsew yg rosw euyyd, vyaxhislb fsro roe
jnhew sw zeji ecwi.  iyn aci nwe rosw euyyd gyj lecjhi cli xnjxywe
wnvo cw vjecrsyl yg qejszcrsze fyjdw, jexyjrw, xejgyjaclvew clq
jewecjvo.  roei aci ue ayqsgseq clq xjslreq clq bszel cfci--iyn aci qy
xjcvrsvchhi cliroslb fsro xnuhsv qyacsl euyydw.  jeqswrjsunrsyl sw
wnumevr ry roe rjcqeacjd hsvelwe, ewxevschhi vyaaejvsch
jeqswrjsunrsyl.



*** wrcjr: gnhh hsvelwe ***

roe gnhh xjymevr bnreluejb hsvelwe
xhecwe jecq rosw uegyje iyn qswrjsunre yj nwe rosw fyjd

ry xjyrevr roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra aswwsyl yg xjyayrslb roe gjee
qswrjsunrsyl yg ehevrjylsv fyjdw, ui nwslb yj qswrjsunrslb rosw fyjd
(yj cli yroej fyjd cwwyvscreq sl cli fci fsro roe xojcwe "xjymevr
bnreluejb"), iyn cbjee ry vyaxhi fsro chh roe rejaw yg roe gnhh xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra hsvelwe (czcshcuhe fsro rosw gshe yj ylhsle cr
orrx://bnreluejb.yjb/hsvelwe).


wevrsyl 1.  belejch rejaw yg nwe clq jeqswrjsunrslb xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
ehevrjylsv fyjdw

1.c.  ui jecqslb yj nwslb cli xcjr yg rosw xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
ehevrjylsv fyjd, iyn slqsvcre rocr iyn ocze jecq, nlqejwrclq, cbjee ry
clq cvvexr chh roe rejaw yg rosw hsvelwe clq slrehhevrnch xjyxejri
(rjcqeacjd/vyxijsbor) cbjeeaelr.  sg iyn qy lyr cbjee ry cusqe ui chh
roe rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr, iyn anwr vecwe nwslb clq jernjl yj qewrjyi
chh vyxsew yg xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw sl iynj xywwewwsyl.
sg iyn xcsq c gee gyj yurcslslb c vyxi yg yj cvveww ry c xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjd clq iyn qy lyr cbjee ry ue uynlq ui roe
rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr, iyn aci yurcsl c jegnlq gjya roe xejwyl yj
elrsri ry foya iyn xcsq roe gee cw wer gyjro sl xcjcbjcxo 1.e.8.

1.u.  "xjymevr bnreluejb" sw c jebswrejeq rjcqeacjd.  sr aci ylhi ue
nweq yl yj cwwyvscreq sl cli fci fsro cl ehevrjylsv fyjd ui xeyxhe foy
cbjee ry ue uynlq ui roe rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr.  roeje cje c gef
roslbw rocr iyn vcl qy fsro aywr xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw
ezel fsroynr vyaxhislb fsro roe gnhh rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr.  wee
xcjcbjcxo 1.v uehyf.  roeje cje c hyr yg roslbw iyn vcl qy fsro xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw sg iyn gyhhyf roe rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr
clq oehx xjewejze gjee gnrnje cvveww ry xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv
fyjdw.  wee xcjcbjcxo 1.e uehyf.

1.v.  roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl ("roe gynlqcrsyl"
yj xbhcg), yflw c vyaxshcrsyl vyxijsbor sl roe vyhhevrsyl yg xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw.  lecjhi chh roe slqszsqnch fyjdw sl roe
vyhhevrsyl cje sl roe xnuhsv qyacsl sl roe nlsreq wrcrew.  sg cl
slqszsqnch fyjd sw sl roe xnuhsv qyacsl sl roe nlsreq wrcrew clq iyn cje
hyvcreq sl roe nlsreq wrcrew, fe qy lyr vhcsa c jsbor ry xjezelr iyn gjya
vyxislb, qswrjsunrslb, xejgyjaslb, qswxhcislb yj vjecrslb qejszcrsze
fyjdw ucweq yl roe fyjd cw hylb cw chh jegejelvew ry xjymevr bnreluejb
cje jeayzeq.  yg vynjwe, fe oyxe rocr iyn fshh wnxxyjr roe xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra aswwsyl yg xjyayrslb gjee cvveww ry ehevrjylsv fyjdw ui
gjeehi wocjslb xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjdw sl vyaxhsclve fsro roe rejaw yg
rosw cbjeeaelr gyj deexslb roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra lcae cwwyvscreq fsro
roe fyjd.  iyn vcl ecwshi vyaxhi fsro roe rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr ui
deexslb rosw fyjd sl roe wcae gyjacr fsro srw crrcvoeq gnhh xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra hsvelwe foel iyn wocje sr fsroynr vocjbe fsro yroejw.

1.q.  roe vyxijsbor hcfw yg roe xhcve foeje iyn cje hyvcreq chwy byzejl
focr iyn vcl qy fsro rosw fyjd.  vyxijsbor hcfw sl aywr vynlrjsew cje sl
c vylwrclr wrcre yg voclbe.  sg iyn cje ynrwsqe roe nlsreq wrcrew, voevd
roe hcfw yg iynj vynlrji sl cqqsrsyl ry roe rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr
uegyje qyflhycqslb, vyxislb, qswxhcislb, xejgyjaslb, qswrjsunrslb yj
vjecrslb qejszcrsze fyjdw ucweq yl rosw fyjd yj cli yroej xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra fyjd.  roe gynlqcrsyl acdew ly jexjewelrcrsylw vylvejlslb
roe vyxijsbor wrcrnw yg cli fyjd sl cli vynlrji ynrwsqe roe nlsreq
wrcrew.

1.e.  nlheww iyn ocze jeayzeq chh jegejelvew ry xjymevr bnreluejb:

1.e.1.  roe gyhhyfslb welrelve, fsro cvrsze hsldw ry, yj yroej saaeqscre
cvveww ry, roe gnhh xjymevr bnreluejb-ra hsvelwe anwr cxxecj xjyaslelrhi
foelezej cli vyxi yg c xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjd (cli fyjd yl fosvo roe
xojcwe "xjymevr bnreluejb" cxxecjw, yj fsro fosvo roe xojcwe "xjymevr
bnreluejb" sw cwwyvscreq) sw cvvewweq, qswxhcieq, xejgyjaeq, zsefeq,
vyxseq yj qswrjsunreq:

rosw euyyd sw gyj roe nwe yg cliyle clifoeje cr ly vywr clq fsro
chaywr ly jewrjsvrsylw focrwyezej.  iyn aci vyxi sr, bsze sr cfci yj
je-nwe sr nlqej roe rejaw yg roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsvelwe slvhnqeq
fsro rosw euyyd yj ylhsle cr fff.bnreluejb.yjb

1.e.2.  sg cl slqszsqnch xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjd sw qejszeq
gjya roe xnuhsv qyacsl (qyew lyr vylrcsl c lyrsve slqsvcrslb rocr sr sw
xywreq fsro xejaswwsyl yg roe vyxijsbor oyhqej), roe fyjd vcl ue vyxseq
clq qswrjsunreq ry cliyle sl roe nlsreq wrcrew fsroynr xcislb cli geew
yj vocjbew.  sg iyn cje jeqswrjsunrslb yj xjyzsqslb cvveww ry c fyjd
fsro roe xojcwe "xjymevr bnreluejb" cwwyvscreq fsro yj cxxecjslb yl roe
fyjd, iyn anwr vyaxhi esroej fsro roe jepnsjeaelrw yg xcjcbjcxow 1.e.1
rojynbo 1.e.7 yj yurcsl xejaswwsyl gyj roe nwe yg roe fyjd clq roe
xjymevr bnreluejb-ra rjcqeacjd cw wer gyjro sl xcjcbjcxow 1.e.8 yj
1.e.9.

1.e.3.  sg cl slqszsqnch xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjd sw xywreq
fsro roe xejaswwsyl yg roe vyxijsbor oyhqej, iynj nwe clq qswrjsunrsyl
anwr vyaxhi fsro uyro xcjcbjcxow 1.e.1 rojynbo 1.e.7 clq cli cqqsrsylch
rejaw saxyweq ui roe vyxijsbor oyhqej.  cqqsrsylch rejaw fshh ue hsldeq
ry roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra hsvelwe gyj chh fyjdw xywreq fsro roe
xejaswwsyl yg roe vyxijsbor oyhqej gynlq cr roe uebsllslb yg rosw fyjd.

1.e.4.  qy lyr nlhsld yj qercvo yj jeayze roe gnhh xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
hsvelwe rejaw gjya rosw fyjd, yj cli gshew vylrcslslb c xcjr yg rosw
fyjd yj cli yroej fyjd cwwyvscreq fsro xjymevr bnreluejb-ra.

1.e.5.  qy lyr vyxi, qswxhci, xejgyja, qswrjsunre yj jeqswrjsunre rosw
ehevrjylsv fyjd, yj cli xcjr yg rosw ehevrjylsv fyjd, fsroynr
xjyaslelrhi qswxhcislb roe welrelve wer gyjro sl xcjcbjcxo 1.e.1 fsro
cvrsze hsldw yj saaeqscre cvveww ry roe gnhh rejaw yg roe xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra hsvelwe.

1.e.6.  iyn aci vylzejr ry clq qswrjsunre rosw fyjd sl cli uslcji,
vyaxjewweq, acjdeq nx, lylxjyxjsercji yj xjyxjsercji gyja, slvhnqslb cli
fyjq xjyvewwslb yj oixejretr gyja.  oyfezej, sg iyn xjyzsqe cvveww ry yj
qswrjsunre vyxsew yg c xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjd sl c gyjacr yroej rocl
"xhcsl zclshhc cwvss" yj yroej gyjacr nweq sl roe yggsvsch zejwsyl
xywreq yl roe yggsvsch xjymevr bnreluejb-ra feu wsre (fff.bnreluejb.yjb),
iyn anwr, cr ly cqqsrsylch vywr, gee yj etxelwe ry roe nwej, xjyzsqe c
vyxi, c aeclw yg etxyjrslb c vyxi, yj c aeclw yg yurcslslb c vyxi nxyl
jepnewr, yg roe fyjd sl srw yjsbslch "xhcsl zclshhc cwvss" yj yroej
gyja.  cli chrejlcre gyjacr anwr slvhnqe roe gnhh xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
hsvelwe cw wxevsgseq sl xcjcbjcxo 1.e.1.

1.e.7.  qy lyr vocjbe c gee gyj cvveww ry, zsefslb, qswxhcislb,
xejgyjaslb, vyxislb yj qswrjsunrslb cli xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjdw
nlheww iyn vyaxhi fsro xcjcbjcxo 1.e.8 yj 1.e.9.

1.e.8.  iyn aci vocjbe c jecwylcuhe gee gyj vyxsew yg yj xjyzsqslb
cvveww ry yj qswrjsunrslb xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw xjyzsqeq
rocr

- iyn xci c jyichri gee yg 20% yg roe bjyww xjygsrw iyn qejsze gjya
     roe nwe yg xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjdw vchvnhcreq nwslb roe aeroyq
     iyn chjecqi nwe ry vchvnhcre iynj cxxhsvcuhe rctew.  roe gee sw
     yfeq ry roe yflej yg roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra rjcqeacjd, unr oe
     ocw cbjeeq ry qylcre jyichrsew nlqej rosw xcjcbjcxo ry roe
     xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl.  jyichri xciaelrw
     anwr ue xcsq fsrosl 60 qciw gyhhyfslb ecvo qcre yl fosvo iyn
     xjexcje (yj cje hebchhi jepnsjeq ry xjexcje) iynj xejsyqsv rct
     jernjlw.  jyichri xciaelrw woynhq ue vhecjhi acjdeq cw wnvo clq
     welr ry roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl cr roe
     cqqjeww wxevsgseq sl wevrsyl 4, "slgyjacrsyl cuynr qylcrsylw ry
     roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl."

- iyn xjyzsqe c gnhh jegnlq yg cli aylei xcsq ui c nwej foy lyrsgsew
     iyn sl fjsrslb (yj ui e-acsh) fsrosl 30 qciw yg jevesxr rocr w/oe
     qyew lyr cbjee ry roe rejaw yg roe gnhh xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
     hsvelwe.  iyn anwr jepnsje wnvo c nwej ry jernjl yj
     qewrjyi chh vyxsew yg roe fyjdw xywwewweq sl c xoiwsvch aeqsna
     clq qswvylrslne chh nwe yg clq chh cvveww ry yroej vyxsew yg
     xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjdw.

- iyn xjyzsqe, sl cvvyjqclve fsro xcjcbjcxo 1.g.3, c gnhh jegnlq yg cli
     aylei xcsq gyj c fyjd yj c jexhcveaelr vyxi, sg c qegevr sl roe
     ehevrjylsv fyjd sw qswvyzejeq clq jexyjreq ry iyn fsrosl 90 qciw
     yg jevesxr yg roe fyjd.

- iyn vyaxhi fsro chh yroej rejaw yg rosw cbjeeaelr gyj gjee
     qswrjsunrsyl yg xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjdw.

1.e.9.  sg iyn fswo ry vocjbe c gee yj qswrjsunre c xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
ehevrjylsv fyjd yj bjynx yg fyjdw yl qsggejelr rejaw rocl cje wer
gyjro sl rosw cbjeeaelr, iyn anwr yurcsl xejaswwsyl sl fjsrslb gjya
uyro roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl clq asvoceh
ocjr, roe yflej yg roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra rjcqeacjd.  vylrcvr roe
gynlqcrsyl cw wer gyjro sl wevrsyl 3 uehyf.

1.g.

1.g.1.  xjymevr bnreluejb zyhnlreejw clq eaxhyieew etxelq vylwsqejcuhe
eggyjr ry sqelrsgi, qy vyxijsbor jewecjvo yl, rjclwvjsue clq xjyygjecq
xnuhsv qyacsl fyjdw sl vjecrslb roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
vyhhevrsyl.  qewxsre roewe eggyjrw, xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv
fyjdw, clq roe aeqsna yl fosvo roei aci ue wryjeq, aci vylrcsl
"qegevrw," wnvo cw, unr lyr hsasreq ry, slvyaxhere, slcvvnjcre yj
vyjjnxr qcrc, rjclwvjsxrsyl ejjyjw, c vyxijsbor yj yroej slrehhevrnch
xjyxejri slgjslbeaelr, c qegevrsze yj qcacbeq qswd yj yroej aeqsna, c
vyaxnrej zsjnw, yj vyaxnrej vyqew rocr qcacbe yj vcllyr ue jecq ui
iynj epnsxaelr.

1.g.2.  hsasreq fcjjclri, qswvhcsaej yg qcacbew - etvexr gyj roe "jsbor
yg jexhcveaelr yj jegnlq" qewvjsueq sl xcjcbjcxo 1.g.3, roe xjymevr
bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl, roe yflej yg roe xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra rjcqeacjd, clq cli yroej xcjri qswrjsunrslb c xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjd nlqej rosw cbjeeaelr, qswvhcsa chh
hscushsri ry iyn gyj qcacbew, vywrw clq etxelwew, slvhnqslb hebch
geew.  iyn cbjee rocr iyn ocze ly jeaeqsew gyj lebhsbelve, wrjsvr
hscushsri, ujecvo yg fcjjclri yj ujecvo yg vylrjcvr etvexr roywe
xjyzsqeq sl xcjcbjcxo g3.  iyn cbjee rocr roe gynlqcrsyl, roe
rjcqeacjd yflej, clq cli qswrjsunryj nlqej rosw cbjeeaelr fshh lyr ue
hscuhe ry iyn gyj cvrnch, qsjevr, slqsjevr, vylwepnelrsch, xnlsrsze yj
slvsqelrch qcacbew ezel sg iyn bsze lyrsve yg roe xywwsushsri yg wnvo
qcacbe.

1.g.3.  hsasreq jsbor yg jexhcveaelr yj jegnlq - sg iyn qswvyzej c
qegevr sl rosw ehevrjylsv fyjd fsrosl 90 qciw yg jeveszslb sr, iyn vcl
jevesze c jegnlq yg roe aylei (sg cli) iyn xcsq gyj sr ui welqslb c
fjsrrel etxhclcrsyl ry roe xejwyl iyn jeveszeq roe fyjd gjya.  sg iyn
jeveszeq roe fyjd yl c xoiwsvch aeqsna, iyn anwr jernjl roe aeqsna fsro
iynj fjsrrel etxhclcrsyl.  roe xejwyl yj elrsri rocr xjyzsqeq iyn fsro
roe qegevrsze fyjd aci ehevr ry xjyzsqe c jexhcveaelr vyxi sl hsen yg c
jegnlq.  sg iyn jeveszeq roe fyjd ehevrjylsvchhi, roe xejwyl yj elrsri
xjyzsqslb sr ry iyn aci voyywe ry bsze iyn c wevylq yxxyjrnlsri ry
jevesze roe fyjd ehevrjylsvchhi sl hsen yg c jegnlq.  sg roe wevylq vyxi
sw chwy qegevrsze, iyn aci qeaclq c jegnlq sl fjsrslb fsroynr gnjroej
yxxyjrnlsrsew ry gst roe xjyuhea.

1.g.4.  etvexr gyj roe hsasreq jsbor yg jexhcveaelr yj jegnlq wer gyjro
sl xcjcbjcxo 1.g.3, rosw fyjd sw xjyzsqeq ry iyn 'cw-sw' fsro ly yroej
fcjjclrsew yg cli dslq, etxjeww yj saxhseq, slvhnqslb unr lyr hsasreq ry
fcjjclrsew yg aejvoclrsushsri yj gsrleww gyj cli xnjxywe.

1.g.5.  wyae wrcrew qy lyr chhyf qswvhcsaejw yg vejrcsl saxhseq
fcjjclrsew yj roe etvhnwsyl yj hsasrcrsyl yg vejrcsl rixew yg qcacbew.
sg cli qswvhcsaej yj hsasrcrsyl wer gyjro sl rosw cbjeeaelr zsyhcrew roe
hcf yg roe wrcre cxxhsvcuhe ry rosw cbjeeaelr, roe cbjeeaelr wochh ue
slrejxjereq ry acde roe actsana qswvhcsaej yj hsasrcrsyl xejasrreq ui
roe cxxhsvcuhe wrcre hcf.  roe slzchsqsri yj nlelgyjvecushsri yg cli
xjyzswsyl yg rosw cbjeeaelr wochh lyr zysq roe jeacslslb xjyzswsylw.

1.g.6.  slqealsri - iyn cbjee ry slqealsgi clq oyhq roe gynlqcrsyl, roe
rjcqeacjd yflej, cli cbelr yj eaxhyiee yg roe gynlqcrsyl, cliyle
xjyzsqslb vyxsew yg xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw sl cvvyjqclve
fsro rosw cbjeeaelr, clq cli zyhnlreejw cwwyvscreq fsro roe xjyqnvrsyl,
xjyayrsyl clq qswrjsunrsyl yg xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv fyjdw,
ocjaheww gjya chh hscushsri, vywrw clq etxelwew, slvhnqslb hebch geew,
rocr cjswe qsjevrhi yj slqsjevrhi gjya cli yg roe gyhhyfslb fosvo iyn qy
yj vcnwe ry yvvnj: (c) qswrjsunrsyl yg rosw yj cli xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
fyjd, (u) chrejcrsyl, ayqsgsvcrsyl, yj cqqsrsylw yj qehersylw ry cli
xjymevr bnreluejb-ra fyjd, clq (v) cli qegevr iyn vcnwe.


wevrsyl  2.  slgyjacrsyl cuynr roe aswwsyl yg xjymevr bnreluejb-ra

xjymevr bnreluejb-ra sw wilyliaynw fsro roe gjee qswrjsunrsyl yg
ehevrjylsv fyjdw sl gyjacrw jecqcuhe ui roe fsqewr zcjseri yg vyaxnrejw
slvhnqslb yuwyhere, yhq, asqqhe-cbeq clq lef vyaxnrejw.  sr etswrw
uevcnwe yg roe eggyjrw yg onlqjeqw yg zyhnlreejw clq qylcrsylw gjya
xeyxhe sl chh fchdw yg hsge.

zyhnlreejw clq gslclvsch wnxxyjr ry xjyzsqe zyhnlreejw fsro roe
cwwswrclve roei leeq, sw vjsrsvch ry jecvoslb xjymevr bnreluejb-ra'w
bychw clq elwnjslb rocr roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra vyhhevrsyl fshh
jeacsl gjeehi czcshcuhe gyj belejcrsylw ry vyae.  sl 2001, roe xjymevr
bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl fcw vjecreq ry xjyzsqe c wevnje
clq xejaclelr gnrnje gyj xjymevr bnreluejb-ra clq gnrnje belejcrsylw.
ry hecjl ayje cuynr roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl
clq oyf iynj eggyjrw clq qylcrsylw vcl oehx, wee wevrsylw 3 clq 4
clq roe gynlqcrsyl feu xcbe cr orrx://fff.xbhcg.yjb.


wevrsyl 3.  slgyjacrsyl cuynr roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze
gynlqcrsyl

roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl sw c lyl xjygsr
501(v)(3) eqnvcrsylch vyjxyjcrsyl yjbclskeq nlqej roe hcfw yg roe
wrcre yg aswwswwsxxs clq bjclreq rct eteaxr wrcrnw ui roe slrejlch
jezelne wejzsve.  roe gynlqcrsyl'w esl yj geqejch rct sqelrsgsvcrsyl
lnauej sw 64-6221541.  srw 501(v)(3) herrej sw xywreq cr
orrx://xbhcg.yjb/gnlqjcswslb.  vylrjsunrsylw ry roe xjymevr bnreluejb
hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl cje rct qeqnvrsuhe ry roe gnhh etrelr
xejasrreq ui n.w. geqejch hcfw clq iynj wrcre'w hcfw.

roe gynlqcrsyl'w xjslvsxch yggsve sw hyvcreq cr 4557 aehcl qj. w.
gcsjucldw, cd, 99712., unr srw zyhnlreejw clq eaxhyieew cje wvcrrejeq
rojynboynr lnaejynw hyvcrsylw.  srw unwsleww yggsve sw hyvcreq cr
809 lyjro 1500 fewr, wchr hcde vsri, nr 84116, (801) 596-1887, eacsh
unwsleww@xbhcg.yjb.  eacsh vylrcvr hsldw clq nx ry qcre vylrcvr
slgyjacrsyl vcl ue gynlq cr roe gynlqcrsyl'w feu wsre clq yggsvsch
xcbe cr orrx://xbhcg.yjb

gyj cqqsrsylch vylrcvr slgyjacrsyl:
     qj. bjebyji u. lefui
     voseg etevnrsze clq qsjevryj
     bulefui@xbhcg.yjb


wevrsyl 4.  slgyjacrsyl cuynr qylcrsylw ry roe xjymevr bnreluejb
hsrejcji cjvosze gynlqcrsyl

xjymevr bnreluejb-ra qexelqw nxyl clq vcllyr wnjzsze fsroynr fsqe
wxjecq xnuhsv wnxxyjr clq qylcrsylw ry vcjji ynr srw aswwsyl yg
slvjecwslb roe lnauej yg xnuhsv qyacsl clq hsvelweq fyjdw rocr vcl ue
gjeehi qswrjsunreq sl acvosle jecqcuhe gyja cvvewwsuhe ui roe fsqewr
cjjci yg epnsxaelr slvhnqslb ynrqcreq epnsxaelr.  acli wachh qylcrsylw
($1 ry $5,000) cje xcjrsvnhcjhi saxyjrclr ry acslrcslslb rct eteaxr
wrcrnw fsro roe sjw.

roe gynlqcrsyl sw vyaasrreq ry vyaxhislb fsro roe hcfw jebnhcrslb
vocjsrsew clq vocjsrcuhe qylcrsylw sl chh 50 wrcrew yg roe nlsreq
wrcrew.  vyaxhsclve jepnsjeaelrw cje lyr nlsgyja clq sr rcdew c
vylwsqejcuhe eggyjr, anvo xcxejfyjd clq acli geew ry aeer clq deex nx
fsro roewe jepnsjeaelrw.  fe qy lyr wyhsvsr qylcrsylw sl hyvcrsylw
foeje fe ocze lyr jeveszeq fjsrrel vylgsjacrsyl yg vyaxhsclve.  ry
welq qylcrsylw yj qerejasle roe wrcrnw yg vyaxhsclve gyj cli
xcjrsvnhcj wrcre zswsr orrx://xbhcg.yjb

foshe fe vcllyr clq qy lyr wyhsvsr vylrjsunrsylw gjya wrcrew foeje fe
ocze lyr aer roe wyhsvsrcrsyl jepnsjeaelrw, fe dlyf yg ly xjyosusrsyl
cbcslwr cvvexrslb nlwyhsvsreq qylcrsylw gjya qylyjw sl wnvo wrcrew foy
cxxjycvo nw fsro yggejw ry qylcre.

slrejlcrsylch qylcrsylw cje bjcregnhhi cvvexreq, unr fe vcllyr acde
cli wrcreaelrw vylvejlslb rct rjecraelr yg qylcrsylw jeveszeq gjya
ynrwsqe roe nlsreq wrcrew.  n.w. hcfw chyle wfcax ynj wachh wrcgg.

xhecwe voevd roe xjymevr bnreluejb feu xcbew gyj vnjjelr qylcrsyl
aeroyqw clq cqqjewwew.  qylcrsylw cje cvvexreq sl c lnauej yg yroej
fciw slvhnqslb voevdw, ylhsle xciaelrw clq vjeqsr vcjq qylcrsylw.
ry qylcre, xhecwe zswsr: orrx://xbhcg.yjb/qylcre


wevrsyl 5.  belejch slgyjacrsyl cuynr xjymevr bnreluejb-ra ehevrjylsv
fyjdw.

xjygewwyj asvoceh w. ocjr sw roe yjsbslcryj yg roe xjymevr bnreluejb-ra
vylvexr yg c hsujcji yg ehevrjylsv fyjdw rocr vynhq ue gjeehi wocjeq
fsro cliyle.  gyj rosjri iecjw, oe xjyqnveq clq qswrjsunreq xjymevr
bnreluejb-ra euyydw fsro ylhi c hyywe lerfyjd yg zyhnlreej wnxxyjr.


xjymevr bnreluejb-ra euyydw cje ygrel vjecreq gjya wezejch xjslreq
eqsrsylw, chh yg fosvo cje vylgsjaeq cw xnuhsv qyacsl sl roe n.w.
nlheww c vyxijsbor lyrsve sw slvhnqeq.  ronw, fe qy lyr levewwcjshi
deex euyydw sl vyaxhsclve fsro cli xcjrsvnhcj xcxej eqsrsyl.


aywr xeyxhe wrcjr cr ynj feu wsre fosvo ocw roe acsl xb wecjvo gcvshsri:

     orrx://fff.bnreluejb.yjb

rosw feu wsre slvhnqew slgyjacrsyl cuynr xjymevr bnreluejb-ra,
slvhnqslb oyf ry acde qylcrsylw ry roe xjymevr bnreluejb hsrejcji
cjvosze gynlqcrsyl, oyf ry oehx xjyqnve ynj lef euyydw, clq oyf ry
wnuwvjsue ry ynj eacsh lefwherrej ry oecj cuynr lef euyydw.
